# Gandhian Economic Thought

**J. C. Kumarappa**

## Contents

[TOC]

## J C Kumarappa

J C Kumarappa was born at Tanjore on 4 January 1892. He belonged to a middle class, orthodox, Christian family of Tamil Nadu. His father, S D Cornelius, was at that time an officer in the Public Works Department of the government of Madras.

His mother, Esther Rajanayakam, was from a devout Christian stock of South India. She had read widely for her generation, especially in Tamil, but was not a learned woman according to the standards of university education. She lived a life of comparative simplicity in consonance with the tenets of Christ. Her piety, her compassion and love for neighbours were reflected in her actions and her eagerness to help those in distress. Her life and her behaviour made a lasting impression on Joseph's mind much more than any book on theology could have done.

As a child Joseph was fond of pets. His mother encouraged him to breed poultry. When she went to the market at the beginning of every month to get her monthly store, she would take the young lad with her to buy chicken-feed. During the month he would sell eggs and keep accounts. And at the end of the month his mother would ask him to find out what profit had been made out of the sale. This profit had to be made over to her for disbursing it on simple charities, like supporting some orphan child at school. Even when Joseph was a grown up man and was working as a Public Auditor, he had to send her 'tithes' out of his income, on the first of each month. This 'tithe' did not mean a mathematical one-tenth, but a kind of a liberal tax collected by the mother to meet the requirements of her charity budget! Besides some such personal contributions she also goaded her children to go around and collect from their friends too.

While the mother, in this way, contributed largely to the moral and spiritual upbringing, the father also laid a foundation of a good social living. He was a strict disciplinarian, punctual, systematic, and a man of few words. He put the children in the best school available and guided their studies at home. Although an affectionate father, he did not spare the rod when an occasion called for it. Thus, both parents played their part in what they thought -an essential home-training.

Joseph was a bright student at school. From childhood, because of his latent leanings, he was intended for the engineering profession but events led him to accountancy. In 1913 he went to London and qualified himself for an Incorporated Accountant. He lived and worked there for some years and when the First World War was over in 1919, he came back to India, on his mother's persistent request, and set up his practice in Bombay. In the beginning he worked with an English firm but in 1924 separated himself from that firm and started his own under the name of Cornelius and Davar.

In 1927, Joseph decided to go to the U.S.A. for respite, but after a month he joined Syracuse University and took his B.Sc. in Business Administration in 1928. Next year he went to Columbia University to study public finance. His Professor Dr ERA Seligman had seen a press report in The New York Times of a casual lecture which Joseph had delivered in a church on "Why then is India Poor?" Dr. Seligman was so much impressed by this report that he advised Joseph that his Master Degree essay should be on the 'causes of Indian poverty through public finance.' Responding to his Professor's advice Joseph changed his subject and the study of the proposed subject so convinced him of British injustice and exploitation that he became a nationalist. In this process of his change of heart, he took up the original Hindu surname of his family-Kumarappa.

Kumarappa's change in economic perception was gradual and sound. He started viewing it from different angles. In his formative days he was fed on capitalist and pro-imperialist philosophies by the educational institutions of Madras. The whole background of his heyday was city centred. This background got a boost up in England. The years of his training in his mother's lap and later at her knees had reinforced in him a moral approach towards humanity, but this was suppressed in the maddening rush and turmoil of London life.

The one and only redeeming spot in this horizon was, that the British in their business relationship, as a rule took care to see that an individual's pursuit did not mar the nation's good. One of the favourite slogans, which the accountant, to whom Kumarappa was articled, constantly repeated was: 'Never make a mistake which will make another man fall.' And in special application, his principal's wife always impressed upon him that in whatever one did, one must consider the social implication of one's action.

Whenever Kumarappa bought anything, she would invariably examine his purchases and offered her criticism. If he had bought anything shoddy, she would immediately say that by buying such defective things we harm ourselves, because we get inferior goods and at the same time we encourage production of undesirable goods by providing a market for them. The fault in such cases lies more with the consumer rather than the producer, for the producer only follows the lead given by the consumer. Besides, inferior goods tend to bring disrepute to the nation's manufacturers.

These and similar lessons helped Kumarappa change his perspective. At Columbia University he took a seminar, entitled 'The Economics of Enterprise.' The Professor of this subject was one Dr H J Davenport. He led a school of thought that no consideration other than individual profits should weigh in economics. The purpose of production, he held, was the increase of purchasing power. To Kumarappa this philosophy seemed wholly wrong, and he fought tooth and nail to assail it. The Professor was liberal enough to assign A-one his performance. And Kumarappa went ahead on his mo lines of thought.

From this time onwards, Kumarappa was pretty clear his mind that man is not merely a wealth-producing agent but essentially a member of the society with political, social, moral and spiritual responsibilities. With this conviction he lost interest in making money and wrote such essays which drew the attention of Mahatma Gandhi, who turned him in a constructive worker. The natural engineering talents of young Joseph bloomed to its full in national reconstruction engineering and the auditor in him developed into an audaciously fearless and unrelenting critic in later life.

In those early days when Kumarappa started working with Gandhi, Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya complimented Gandhi for the wonderful training he had given to Kumarappa. In reply to the compliments Gandhi had said: 'I haven't trained Kumarappa, he came to me readymade.'

That readymade man came to India in 1929 and was anxious to see his study of Indian public finance published. A friend, C H Sopariwala advised him to contact Gandhi.  Thereupon, Kumarappa sought a meeting with him. Pyarelal Gandhi's secretary, telephoned Kumarappa and informed him that he could see Gandhi in Sabarmati Ashram on a certain date. Accordingly, Kumarappa went to the Ashram and was horrified at the sight of the Guest Room. The Guest Room was devoid of all furniture except a charpai. Squatting toilet arrangements made him more eager to get away from it at the earliest moment. His appointment with Gandhi was at 2 p.m. He had ample time to loiter on the banks of Sabarmati. After spending his time here and there, he went to see Gandhi.

On the way up, he saw an old man, sitting under a tree on a neatly cleaned floor, spinning. Kumarappa leaned on his walking stick curiously watching the spinning process. The old man, after about five minutes, opened his toothless mouth and with a smile enquired if he was Kumarappa. It soon dawned upon the visitor that his questioner might not be anyone else than Mahatma Gandhi. In reply he also asked him if he was Gandhi. The old man nodded in affirmation; so Kumarappa promptly sat down on the floor regardless of the crease of his silken trousers. Finding him uncomfortable in his sitting posture, someone brought a chair from the house, but he declined to avail of the courtesy, saying that since Gandhi was seated on the floor he would not like to take the chair.

At the outset Gandhi told Kumarappa that he was interested in the essay written by him and that he wished to publish it, in a series of articles in his weekly magazine the Young India. He also enquired if Kumarappa would undertake a rural survey for him in Gujarat. Kumarappa raised the difficulty of language, but Gandhi quickly brushed it aside, saying that he would place the professors of economics of Gujarat Vidyapith with all their students at Kumarappa's disposal to help him with the survey. He also suggested that he should go and see the Vice-Chancellor of the Gujarat, Vidyapith, Kaka Kalelkar, the person who had come up with a chair for him.

In the afternoon he went to see Kaka Kalelkar. Seeing Kumarappa dressed in the fashionable western style, Kaka Saheb did not feel that Kumarappa would fit into the sort of work Gandhi wanted him to do. Kaka saheb, also, felt that his ignorance of Gujarati language would be a major handicap. So he did not encourage him, quite unintentionally. Kumarappa in a huff returned to Bombay, even without taking leave of Gandhi. From Bombay he wrote to Gandhi that he would be glad to help him with any work, but that Kaka Saheb did not think that he would be of any use. By return of post Kumarappa received a letter from Kaka Saheb saying that he would be most happy if Kumarappa accepted the work that Gandhi wanted him to do.

While Kumarappa started his work, Gandhi set on foot upon his Dandi March. During the course of Gandhi's march Kumarappa's articles on 'Public Finance And Our Poverty' began to appear in Young India. Gandhi wanted them to be put together in the form of a pamphlet and Kumarappa desired that it should bear a foreword from Gandhi. To discuss the matter he invited Kumarappa to meet him at Karadi, where he was camping then.

In his own 'efficient' way Kumarappa had prepared a foreword for him, took it all type-written and ready for him to sign! Gandhi looked at it, smiled and put it aside saying: 'My foreword will be mine and will not be written by Kumarappa.' He said, that he had called him not so much to discuss the writing of the foreword, but to ask if he would regularly write for Young India, incase he and Mahadev Desai were arrested by the Government. Kumarappa told him that he knew 'auditing dusty ledgers' and never ventured to write as a journalist. In reply Gandhi said, 'As regards your qualifications to write, I as editor of the paper have to sit on judgement and not you. It is I that invite you to write for this paper.' Kumarappa in fact, did write for the paper and ultimately landed in jail, not to return to practice as an auditor in Bombay. If at all he went there after his release from the prison, it was to buy his first Khadi dress from Bombay.

In 1930, according to the wishes of Gandhi, Kumarappa took up a detailed economic survey of Matar taluka in Kheda district. In 1931 he experienced his first jail-life in Ahmedabad, when he was sentenced to one year and six months rigorous imprisonment. In March 1931 he came out of jail after the Gandhi-Irwin Pact. At the Karachi Congress, in the same year, Kumarappa was chosen as the convener of a select Committee to go into the details of the financial obligation between Great Britain and India up to that time. When Gandhi, Mahadev Desai and others went to England for the Round Table Conference, Kumarappa had to assume editorship of Young India. This again led him to jail for a second time for his pungent writings inYoung India. This time he was sentenced to two years and six months' rigorous imprisonment.

On his release from jail, a different type of work was waiting for him. In the disaster that swept Bihar owing to the earthquake in 1934, relief work on a large-scale had to be administered. Finding Dr Rajendra Prasad overburdened with that work Gandhi asked Jamnalal Bajaj to go and help him. Jamnalalji, in turn, requested the help of Kumarappa as Financial Adviser. Kumarappa was immediately informed to proceed to Patna. He did his work so well as to earn laurels from Dr Rajendra Prasad who said that Kumarappa's meticulous accounting had really saved the honour of Bihar. From this experience of the relief work, Kumarappa wrote a pamphlet named Organization and Accounts of Relief Work.

Kumarappa was a strict disciplinarian. In Bihar he laid down that three annas would be allowed as the maximum food expense to a relief worker per day. A common kitchen was organised and managed within the prescribed limit.

He made similar rules for the use of motor cars. Once, Gandhi came to Patna to attend a committee meeting of the Relief Fund. His retinue was accustomed to food articles like milk, fruits and vegetables. This went beyond the three anna limit. Kumarappa explained to Mahadevbhai his difficulty in paying these expenses out of the Relief Funds. He also told Mahadev Desai that it will be helpful, if he could make arrangements on his own to get petrol for Gandhi's motor car. The matter reached Gandhi's ears. He called Kumarappa and said that he had come exclusively for the committee's work and wanted to know the grounds on which he refused meeting with his bills. Kumarappa explained the austerity rules he had made to maintain uniformity in spending money obtained as donation from the people and was not in favour of making exceptions. Gandhi got his point. He asked Mahadevbhai not to present the bills to the committee.

On one occasion Gandhi wired to Kumarappa that he was coming to Patna to consult him. He arrived at Patna about 10 p.m. one evening, and asked Rajendra Babu to inform Kumarappa. Rajen Babu told him that there was a difference of a few annas in the Relief Committee's accounts. The Auditors had failed to locate the error. The annual meeting was scheduled on the following day, so Kumarappa had shut himself up in a room, with two young men. He seemed determined to work all night until the error is traced. When he worked like that, he was like a lion and no one could dare disturb him. Gandhi said, 'All right! leave him alone. I shall see him in the morning.' Next day Gandhi saw him and asked for an appointment. Kumarappa replied, not today, but perhaps tomorrow." Gandhi said, "But I am going away tonight to Wardha." Kumarappa told him that in that case he would have to go away without seeing him. Gandhi said, "1 had come all the way from Benaras and you won't give me time?" Kumarappa replied, "But you had not taken an appointment with me. If I were free I would go all the way to Timbuctoo to see you but I am frightfully busy today with the Relief Committee's annual meeting." Gandhi instructed Mahadevbhai to leave the papers for Kumarappa's perusal. After a fortnight Kumarappa went to Wardha to discuss that matter with Gandhi. This quality had won him the pet name 'Colonel Sahib' in Gandhi's inner circle.

There are many incidents where even big personalities and public leaders were made to conform to the common rule. His daily life was tuned to time and all appointments had to be previously fixed. Strange though it may seem, but even his sisters and brothers were allocated particular time for meeting, whenever they came to see him! There was not a single minute which he could call his own.

On 27 October 1934, the Indian National Congress, passed a resolution to set up an All India Village Industries Association. Kumarappa was made Secretary of the new, association. He was to work under the advice and guidance of Gandhi. Kumarappa read this news in the daily papers in Patna. As his previous consent was not obtained, Kumarappa was perplexed and wrote to Gandhi. In reply to his letter Gandhi, 'I see I made a mistake in not getting your consent... But what is to be done now?... Please, begin the work forgetting the omission of formalities.'

Later, meeting Gandhi, Kumarappa asked, 'Where are the funds and where are the workers?' Then Gandhi laughed and said, 'As for funds, don't bother. You will get whatever is needed. And for workers start yourself as number one.'

In compliance with the resolution of the Congress, Kumarappa plunged into the work of organising and undertook tours throughout the country. Maganwadi in Wardha became the headquarters of All India Village Industries Association and their functions fell into five parts: research, production, training, extension and organisation, arid propaganda and publication. All these items of work were taken up in and from Maganwadi. A village Industries Laboratory and a Village Industries Museum were established.

Soon after the setting-up of this organisation, Gandhi wrote in 1934, 'The-Central Board of AIVIA will not be a board of administration, but only a watch tower for the whole of India giving guidance. We want to avoid centralisation of administration, we want centralisation of thought, ideas and scientific knowledge.'

Through this medium of AIVIA Kumarappa had shown that the Constructive Programme devised under the guidance of Mahatma Gandhi, if fully implemented, could give all that Communism was assuring the common man plus to give something more of great value. The Constructive Programme was capable of leading to a human society wherein the values of justice and the values of non-violence were obviously existing. The Village Industries movement had stood for a desirable social ideal. It had become the embodiment of the economics of decentralization, of self-sufficiency and of lasting peace.

When Kumarappa found that the policy of Indian National Congress in regard to big industries was not very dear, Kumarappa raised the matter with Dr Rajendra Prasad, the then President of the Congress, and sought a clear direction from him.

Then came the question of reorganising of the educational system. The concept was named as Nai Talim. A committee, headed by Dr Zakir Husain, was formed for the proposed reorganisation. Kumarappa served on this committee as a member. In support of Basic Education, Kumarappa propounded his theory of work in two parts: the hard repetitive labour, and the pleasure enjoyment of results.

In 1937 the National Planning Committee was formed. On Jawaharlal Nehru's request Gandhi asked Kumarappa to work on it; but after some time he felt that his time was ill spent, so he resigned from the Planning Committee.

Thereafter, the Central Provinces' Government constituted an Industrial Survey Committee under the chairmanship of Kumarappa. Kumarappa assumed this task to show how a national programme for our country's upliftment should be chalked out. Later on he was to take up several such assignments and do his job with mathematical accuracy and perfection. After a similar survey of the North West Frontier Province, Kumarappa received a letter from Sir Mirza Ismail, in which he said, 'I should like to compliment you on the very lucid manner in which you have dealt with the various questions relating to the industrial development of the Province. You have approached the whole problem in a direct matter-of-fact and eminently practical way.'

In 1942, Kumarappa was again incarcerated for his article, 'Stone For Bread.' He used his seclusion in reading and writing and came out with two books,Practice and Precepts of Jesus, and The Economy of Permanence. When he was released in 1945 he sent these manuscripts to Gandhi. He had not asked for a foreword for either of them. But to his surprise, Gandhi wrote forewords for both these books. He had addressed Kumarappa as D.D., D.V.I. Here D.D meant Doctor of Divinity, and D.V.I. stood for Doctor of Village Industries.

When Kumarappa later met Gandhi, he asked why Gandhi started conferring doctorates on whomsoever he pleased? Gandhi, with a good humoured laugh, said, "Why should you question my authority to confer a doctorate or to coin degrees? Am I not the Chancellor of Gujarat Vidyapith?"

Kumarappa had a clear grasp of what Gandhi wanted to do for rural upliftment. So whenever Kumarappa came forward for rural betterment, they generally met with Gandhi's approval.

In 1946 he formulated an elaborate scheme for rural upliftment. The principles underlying the scheme were self-reliance, self-sufficiency in food and gainful use of the vast resources of human power. In pursuance of this ideal, he declined an offer for minister ship and the membership of the Congress Working Committee.

In 1948, when Gandhi was assassinated, Kumarappa was so shocked that he lost vision of both his eyes. Fortunately he regained his sight after a couple of days.

Soon after the death of Mahatma Gandhi, Kumarappa was called to Delhi by Dr. Rajendra Prasad. It was for consultations in connection with the creation of a Gandhi Memorial Fund. Kumarappa was invited to take charge of this work.

Kumarappa explained to his colleagues that the idea of raising monetary funds was out of place at that time. India had a popular Government and if it so desires it could implement any scheme for Gandhi's memorial. Kumarappa suggested that the Gandhi Memorial Fund should be a unique organization. Therefore the greatest fund that could be raised was a fund of human personality in which men of devotion and detachment should be collected to work for the nation, emanating the light that characterized Gandhi. What is needed for this was an army of men and women imbued with the ideals of non-violence and truth, as taught and expounded by Gandhi, to go forth into the world, expressing these doctrines, not merely by words, but by their deeds.

He suggested finding one lakh such souls for the fund. To administer this human fund Kumarappa wanted three donors namely, Jawaharlal Nehru, Sardar Patel and Rajkumari Amrit Kaur. He suggested that these three donors should relinquish their respective offices and devote themselves fully to this cause. He expected Nehru to go to the youth in colleges and universities and collect young men. Similarly Rajkumari was supposed to collect women-folk and Sardar Patel was to concentrate on organizing institutions like Vidyapiths designed to train for political statesmanship.

These ideas, however, did not find favour with any of them. So Kumarappa returned a disappointed man leaving behind Kripalani to look after the money bag only!

In the post-independence period, Kumarappa traveled on various missions to countries like England, the Soviet Union, Germany, China and Japan. But he had over-exerted himself to the national cause. He was not keeping well now. He, therefore, retired from active public work and settled down in Gandhi Niketan in Madurai district.

Vinoba Bhave, while on his Bhoodan march went to see Kumarappa in 1956. Kumarappa took Vinobaji into his hut. In the hut was a picture of Mahatma Gandhi. When Vinoba looked at the picture with affection and concentration, Kumarappa broke the silence and said, 'He is my master' and pointing at another one he said, 'And here is my master's master'. That picture was of a poor farmer.

On 30 January 1960 a lady came to see Kumarappa. While taking his leave, she told Kumarappa that she had planned to go and attend the death anniversary meeting of Gandhi. Kumarappa promptly said, "I shall also attend that meeting." The lady was perplexed. How would Kumarappa attend the meeting in such a state of health!

The same evening Kumarappa breathed his last and merged with the soul of his Master.

## Preface

It is obvious that as is other spheres, Gandhiji's ideas have a marked influencein the economic sphere also. This is so not only because of the generalinfluence of Gandhiji's ideas on the masses of the people, but also because theleaders of the Congress who are now in power have imbibed his teachings, andare naturally trying to put the same into practice as far as possible.

It is true that we do not have any definite scheme of economic thought evolvedHis economic ideas are part of his general philosophy of life; they are reflectedin his writings and speeches, mixed up with other related topics; they have tobe discerned more in his actions, which must be viewed in their entirety notmerely in an isolated way. In other words, one has to interpret Gandhiji'seconomic ideas and build up what may be described as Gandhian EconomicThought from what he did and said in this connection. It should not be difficultfor several eminent persons in and out of the Congress organization, who camein intimate touch with him and were in a position to imbibe his ideas firsthand,to help in disentangling Gandhiji's economic thought so that it may help thefuture generation to understand it better.

Shri J. C. Kumarappa is well-known as one of the trusted disciples of Gandhijiwho was asked to carry out his economic ideas into practice and in doing so hadobvious opportunities of understanding firsthand Gandhiji's point of view. It isfortunate, therefore, that Shri Kumarappa has been good enough to agree towrite this book, in which he has attempted to build up the Gandhian EconomicThought in simple, but effective language. As he rightly points out, there in nosuch thing as the principles of economics of Gandhiji, According to him two lifeprinciples governed all Gandhiji's economic, social, political and otherconsiderations, viz. Truth and Nonviolence. It is in the application of theseexposition of Gandhiji's economic ideas by Shri Kumarappa will, I trust, give animpetus to other persons, who had opportunities to come in contact with  Gandhiji to throw further light on the same, and help by making suggestions toevolve Gandhian Economic Theory. While such a development may take its owncourse, enough has been said in this small book to help in understanding moreclearly some of the ideas which underlie the official policy of the Congressorganization, which directly or indirectly affects the policy of the Governmentof India, and also of the State Governments.

It is well-known that in recent times we in this country are presented withpeculiar conflicts of opinion, methods and actions in the economic sphere, thereal nature of which it is not always easy to grasp. On the one hand, we havehad both in theory and practice considerable influence of western economicthought. On the other hand Gandhiji's economic ideas which are based onentirely different considerations are also influencing official policies in manyways. Partly due to the existing state of affairs in the country which weinherited form the British, and partly due to rapidly changing events both athome and abroad in recent times, we must realize that economic problemspresent complex and difficult issues.

So far as economic development is concerned, we are again considerablyinfluenced by western ideas and methods as well as Gandhiji's economic ideaswhich have become a part of the religion of those in power. Because of theabsence of any synthesis between these points of view, we find in some casescurious situations because of the imposition of one set of ideas on anotherwithout any common link. The country will have to choose, and sooner thechoice is made the better, between one or the other economic policy viz. theconception of the Welfare State as developed in the west, and the conceptionof economic life as reflected in Gandhiji's ideas. It is possible that to someextent the former can be modified by the influence of the latter. But it isobvious that the approaches of the two are entirely different and cannot beeasily reconciled. We may not agree with all that the author says; in fact, thereare many statements from which we may differ; what is of importance,however, is how far and in what manner these ideas can be applied to ourexisting problems and in what way they affect the policy of the present  Government. It is hoped that in the better understanding of the climate ofeconomic opinion in the country the effort made by Dr. Kumarappa will be ofconsiderable help.

**C.N. VAKIL**

School of Economics and Sociology,   
University of Bombay,   
31st March, 1951


## CHAPTER 1

### PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING GANDHIAN ECONOMY

There is no such thing as the principles of Economics of Gandhiji. With Gandhijieconomics is a part of a way of life. There are no governing principles as areapplied in the case of ordinary laws that have been enunciated in text books onEconomics. Only two life principles govern all Gandhiji's economic, social,political and other considerations, viz. Truth and Non-violence. Anything thatcannot be satisfactorily tested on these touch-stones, as it were, cannot beregarded as Gandhian. If a scheme of things leads to violence or necessitatesuntruth, then we may regard that as non-Gandhian.

Let us take these two principles and apply them in every walk of life and seewhere truth exists, where nonviolence could be generated. If at any time theseends cannot be achieved, such courses must be abandoned.

First, we shall consider the kinds of motives, after that the relationshipbetween the members of the human family, and lastly, the various types ofnatural resources. We shall then see how these things have to be correlated inour daily fife.

### MOTIVES

If we take the human family, we may divide it into five different groupsaccording to our approach. We can trace them in the ordinary life of evenanimals. For instances, take one that is most violent and cruel, viz. tiger. Howdoes it go about its economic life? How does the tiger find its food? It gets itsfood by killing animals. The tiger does not create, does not contribute anythingtowards production but it consumes without producing Here is Consumptionwithout production. Where does it live? It lives in caves, in natural holes and inrocks. The tiger is parasitic as far as its food is concerned. The tiger's methodof obtaining shelter is predatory.  Take the monkey. How does it get its food? By picking up fruits and leaves hereand there. It gets it by predation. The monkey does not kill the source of itsfood but takes what is available. These are two methods exemplified by thecase of the tiger, and the monkey respectively. There is consumption withoutproduction. Neither of them produces anything and they merely live on thestock that is readily available. In the final analysis, they are both equal butthere is a difference when it comes to the question of the amount of violenceinvolved. The tiger is much more violent than the monkey. The monkey doesnot destroy the source from where its food comes. The first one is parasitic andthe second one is predatory. Both are self-centered. They have no sense ofduty. They think only in terms of their hunger-selfishness and self-centerednessbased on rights.

Then we come to the third position, where there is a balancing of rights withduties. That is what may be called the "Enterprising stage". You produce andyou consume. Look at the abode of the little birds in the house. They pick upwith their bills straw, sticks, cotton etc. and build their nests. The bird buildsits own nest, unlike the tiger which lives in the caves. It builds its nest wherecats cannot get at it, and it enjoys the shelter that has produced with greateffort and forethought. Her production and consumption. It exercises the rightof private property, for when some other bird comes, it will peck at it anddrive it away. Rights and duties are mixed up in it.

We have the fourth stage; the gregarious stage is that of the bee. When a beecollects honey, what does it do? It puts it in the hive. It does not say that aparticular single hole in the comb is its own. It collects for the benefit of thewhole colony. A bee, when it brings honey, puts it in the honey comb andleaves it to be used by the other bees also. It does not produce for its ownpersonal consumption but for general consumption. All the bees live togetheras one family. There is an excess of a sense of duty as against a feeling of right.

Production is greater than Consumption and the surplus is meant for others.

We come to the fifth stage. We mentioned the bird in its nest in the thirdstage. Supposing it has produced a baby. In the morning it goes out, picks up  whatever food, such as grains, is to be found and feeds its young with it. It doesnot say that it has the right to swallow what it has found. It takes it to the littlebaby bird and feeds it. Does it think that when the little one grows up, it wouldfeed the mother when old? Nothing of the sort. It gives without a thought ofany return. It is wholly motivated by a sense of duty. This is what may becalled Mother Economy or Service Economy.

These are the five types under which we may develop the idea of economicactivities, namely, parasitic, Predatory, enterprising, and gregarious and theservice stages. The principles connected with each one of them will differ. Inthe parasitic stage, it is all self-centered and does not think that the wealthcreated belongs to him personally because he himself has laboured. There is asense of oneness and a sense of working for a group.

Service Economy--- a mother is the best instance of this. The mother works forthe child. She does not expect any return. Service is its own reward.

Similarly we may find these divisions in group life, in government, in nations,etc.

Group life based on destruction of life or the esuppression of the rights of otherpeople---which Imperialism is, is jungle economy. By this other countries aresubjugated and the mighty get something out of the weak. It is a parasiteeconomy.1. India had been subjected politically to Great Britain. This is an illustrationof Parasite economy.2. Economic subjugation of others---Financial penetration of America is agood instance of predatoryeconomy.4. Enterprise---The agricultural economy which had been practised in ourcountry in olden days is an instance of the enterprising economy. It is aself-sufficient economy.5. Gregarious economy---Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany may come under thiscategory to a large extent.  6. We do not have in history an instance of a stage of Service Economy, butGandhiji was working towards that stage.

These five stages can be found in our individual daily action also. It is easy tolaugh at others, but when we come to think of ourselves, we are sometimestigers, sometimes monkeys, sometimes this and sometimes that. When we eatuntidily, and throw out all sorts of things, we belong to the tiger stage. Weshould ask each night as to how many times during the day we have been atiger, etc., and if there is a growing tendency towards the mother economy, weare moving towards civilization. Otherwise, we are going towards the junglestage.

The analysis given is nothing very novel, because it is found in the Hindu orderof society. You have the Mlechchas, Shurdas, Vaishya's, Kshatriyas, andBrahmins. If your desire is to help your fellowmen, even though you may be aMlechha by birth, you belong to the Brahmin group- If you are born a Brahminand are doing Government service, for the fat salary you get you are in effect aMelchcha. These Melchchas are at the tiger stage. The Shurdas are predatory.

The Vaishyas, who deal justly, belong to the enterprizing stage. The Vaishya,who gives wrong weights and measures, belongs to the tiger economy. The millowners belong to the tiger economy. If we divide our society into these fivebroad stages, based on actions and not birth, it is possible for the Mlechcha tobe a Brahmin in the service of his fellowmen. Gandhiji's plan was to develophuman beings step by step from the Mlechcha plane onwards to the Brahminstage. The upward progress will be according to one's moral and physicaldevelopment. That is the purpose of all education. At the time when rightsdisappear and duties take their place, we reach the Brahmin or serviceeconomy.

### NATURAL RESOURCES

We then come to the question of the utilization of Natural Resources. In thecase of the use of these resources, again, as we move towards service economy  from parasitic economy the measure of violence will steadily decrease. That ishow non-violence could be promoted.

We may divide natural resources into two classes--- one, which is never ending,like the flow of water in a river. When a bucket of water is taken out from ariver will the level of the river go down? Considered mathematically and byabsolute standards the level does go down, but generally speaking the answer isNo. Some more water comes to fill the depression created. When a little wateris drunk out of a glass of water, the level will go down. Why? In the first casethe supply is relatively unlimited, and in the second case the supply is limited.

These may be termed Current Economy and Reservoir Economy respectively.

The whole Gandhian Economy can now be gauged according to the possibilitiesof violence or non-violence that may be introduced by resorting to Reservoir orCurrent economy in our activities.

When goods are in short supply the competition for its possession will lead toviolence. Hence if our economic organization is such that more reliance isplaced on resources of reservoir economy, there will be more violence. Iron isin limited quantity. It comes under our reservoir economy. If we desire topromote non-violence in society, more percentage of wood, which belongs tocurrent economy, must be used and less of iron. Petrol falls into our reservoireconomy. As it becomes less, and less, its use leads to conflict. The increasingviolence in our society today is due to the nations running into reservoireconomy, abandoning current economy. As petrol so also coal, is of thereservoir economy. Horse, bullock and cow belong to current economy. WhenEngland was on the Horse Economy, they ploughed with horses, theytransported by the use of horses. Violence was much less in England then.

Before the Industrial Revolution set in, they used coal only for cookingpurposes. With the advent of steam power coal became the pivot of theeconomy of England, which passed then from Current Economy to ReservoirEconomy. Violence in England has been increasing for the last 150 years.

In India, the cow has been considered a sacred animal, because it is the centreof our economy. It has been, therefore, glorified into a sacred animal. Tractor  ploughing is reservoir economy. It is made of iron and steel, and petrol or crudeoil is needed to ply it. The instrument we use in producing goods will ultimatelylead to violence or non-violence according to the extent to which we utilisereservoir or current economy.

The Charkha or the spinning wheel belongs to the current economy; while thetextile mills belong to the reservoir economy.

Thermal electricity is altogether reservoir economy. Hydro-electricity is largelyreservoir economy, only the power of turning the wheel is water. The bulk ofthe expenditure on the hydro-electric schemes is in the generating equipmentwhich is, therefore, mainly of reservoir economy. Ultimately, therefore, by andlarge, the electric group may be classified as belonging to reservoir economy.

A mud-hut with thatches for the roof belongs to current economy. Buildings ofcement and concrete belong to the reservoir economy. Current economy ispermanent because it does not lead to competition which will result in violenceand destruction, while reservoir economy is not permanent.

The common plough is of current economy. There is no doubt a little iron in it.

We can use iron also but it should be done in the proportion in which iron isfound in nature. In the mud-huts, we may have iron nails. Our contention isonly that where there is an over-whelming element of reservoir economy, tothat extent violence in our society will be great.

The more we base our order on the current economy, the less will be theviolence. The greater will be the violence when we base our economy onreservoir economy.

### PRODUCT

More and more things are produced to supply our primary needs, less and lesswill be the violence. The more we produce luxuries, the greater will be theviolence that is generated. If you starve people and try to produce luxuryarticles, it will lead to violence. Production of a luxury like tobacco at the costof a primary need like cereals, will weigh the scales towards violence. The  complexion of the economic organization will indicate generally, whether thatorganization will generate violence or will bring about peace and prosperity tothe people. We want to see the principles which will guide us towards therealization of Nonviolence and Truth (the moral considerations we have takenfor granted in the Gandhian Economy) steadily pursued and adopted. Less ofluxuries and more of primary needs would mean more chances of nonviolence.

If we want to infuse non-violence and truth into our society, we have got toremember these principles and organize accordingly.

### METHODS OF PRODUCTION

There are two different methods of producing articles. We can produce them ineither one of those two methods. According to the method we choose, theprinciples used will be different. We shall consider production first andconsumption later. Supposing the mother is making something for her children.

How does she go about it? What are her objectives and how does her methoddiffer from any other way of preparing it? Assume that she wants to preparehalva. How will she do it? The mother who understands what she is doing, willprobably select the wheat and grind it herself to the necessary fineness andkeep the atta whole, without polishing it and taking out of it any of thenutritive elements contained in it. She will, in other words, preserve all thatthere is in that wheat. Then if she has a cow of her own, she will churn thecurd produced out of the milk and prepare her own butter and ghee. Grindingthe wheat is very difficult. Preparing ghee is troublesome. Why does she notpurchase Vanaspati or cheap ghee in the market? She is willing to take all thistrouble because her objective is the nutrition of her children: She is intenselyinterested in the welfare of her children. She considers any amount of labourwhich she takes fully compensated when she finds that her children get thebenefit of it all. It is out of a sense of duty and affection that she does all this.

If she is an intelligent woman, she will study dietetics and find out how thesethings should be prepared without destroying the food values in the  constituents. She has the satisfaction that the children have had the best ofwhat she can afford to give. This is production for use.

Halzua is also prepared by others; the mother has not got the monopoly. Theconfectioner too engages himself in this work. What is his objective? Hisobjective is no doubt to produce something; but his main objective is not theproduction of those articles, but to transfer the money that the customer hasgot into his own pocket, and he seeks the easiest method by which he couldeffect that transfer. For that he will do all sorts of things. The lesser the out-going the better it is for him. He finds out where he can get cheap wheat,perhaps worm-eaten wheat, mill-ground at the cheapest rate, where he can getthe cheapest kind of oil or so-called ghee or some adulterated stuff. If thehalzua does not smell well, he sprinkles some rose-water and adds somecolouring matter so that it is made to look attractive. All other smellsdisappear, as it were, in the over-whelming odour that comes from the stuff heputs in it. One who eats that halwa will suffer from diarrhoea. The confectionerdoes not bother about it. The doctor will perhaps have a share of thecustomer's money too. This is what is called industry or production forexchange.

Naturally work does not go without a reaction on the producer and hispersonality. In so far as one develops, one is developing by one's own actions.

By turning on the radio one will not learn music. One has got to sit up andpractice on the instruments until one's neighbours get tired! The muscles of thefingers and the nerves of he ears and eyes should be co-ordinated. It is thispractice that creates and develops a musician and not merely listening to aradio.

Every action has its own reaction, and these two methods of preparing halwahave their reaction. What is its reaction on the mother? Her intense study ofdietetics will give her a better understanding of the body and its requirementsand she does this for the love of her children and that makes her a betterwoman.  The confectioner wants to give as little as he could and take as mush aspossible. This is in other words robbery. The larger the margin of profit one isable to make, the more successful one is considered as a businessman or as anindustrialist. This carried to the logical extreme may lead to killing a man andtaking away the money he has and will bring a cent per cent return. This canvery well be done. This leads to gangsterism as a profession. This is thementality that is. developed by the confectioner preparing halwa. He developsgreed and irresponsibility. The reaction is thus one of creating parasites onsociety who indulge in robbing one another. When this is done on a nationalscale, we produce a world war. The Mithaiwala* economics creates falsestandards and violence, while the mother's method of production develops herlove and truthfulness, but entails hard work.

An industrialist produces for exchange but the mother produces for homeconsumption. Mother's work is based on the self-sufficient economy but whenwe work on an exchange economy, we are apt to act like the confectioner andfinally end up as gangsters.

### EXCHANGE AND TRADE

When goods that are in short supply enter the general marker there is likely tobe dissatisfaction which will lead finally to violence. True trade can only takeplace in surpluses.

Supposing there are about half a dozen laddus and we give them to a boy. Hegoes on eating one after another. He gets a certain amount of satisfaction whenhe eats the first, and then the second, then the third and by the time he comesto take the fourth one, he feels a minus value. After that he is thirsty. At thisstage another boy appears with a glass of water. There are one or two moreladdus left and the first, boy, whose appetite for laddus is satisted, does notknow how to dispose of these. He says to the other boy. "Give me some waterand I will give you laddus." If they then exchange, both will profit. The thirstyboy gets the water and the hungry one gets the laddus. This is an example of  exchange in surpluses which is mutually beneficial. For human satisfaction mustbe mutual to be real.

On the other hand, if there is one pot of water and if all people want to drink,it will not be sufficient and there will be a fight for it, and in the scramble allthe water may be spilt over and none will be satisfied.

Money or Barter---from time immemorial tokens have been used in exchangingcommodities. But now, with an immense increase in wants, money is being usedto conceal values. It does not report true human values. If we give twelveannas for a seer of milk there is no guarantee that the seller will be able to getan equivalent of one seer of milk in nutrition. He may be tempted to give hischildren tea instead. He may deprive the calf of its due share of its mother'smilk and sell all he gets without nourishing his own children. For this state ofaffairs a high price in money is often responsible. It is an inducement to partwith a more valuable article for a less or even a harmful substitute. Hencemoney deceives and creates violence.

It is through the inducement of money that land is drawn away from foodarticles into cultivating commercially profitable crops like tobacco. Thecommon people are not conscious of the damage done through the medium ofmoney.

Even trade is directed to luxuries from providing the prime necessities of manthrough the use of money. Rich people can afford to spend money freely and sothe merchants and manufacturers organize to cater to their demands ratherthan supply the needs of the poor, as the latter business has little chance ofprofit in it. Rice cultivation will barely meet the cost of production while toiletsoap manufacture will yield attractive dividends. From human standards this isan anti-social direction of economic activity made possible by the agency ofmoney. These and such evils are both violent and dishonest. Barter or exchangein commodities will minimize such danger to a great extent.  CO-OPERATIONHere we do not refer to the legal organization of cooperation but to humanrelationship. Co-operation between people makes for mutual wellbeing. Everymember of society depends for his own happiness on the wellbeing of everyother. If the potter makes pots and the shoe-maker uses aluminium vesselswhere will the potter get his customer to enable him to buy the shoes made byhis fellow villager, the shoemaker? The potter in his turn may, if he can affordit, patronize machine- made shoes. After a while both the artisans will becomeextinct. Our course of daily routine must be calculated to bring about mutualgood. Such co-operation alone will save our villagers from economic distress.

Economic co-operation weaves the village into a pattern which builds up unitywithout this organic unity community life will disintegrate, creating divisions and dissension's as we find them today. Such scattered communities inviteoutsiders to exploit the situation. To work towards such unity we need self-discipline and self- control. If a village uses articles imported from America,the warp is in the village but the woof is in U.

S.A. This cannot form a patterncalculated to protect the village which will be destined to form part ofeconomic America ultimately. No army, navy or air force can prevent thishappening. A proper economic co-operative unity is the core of non-violentdefense against foreign aggression. It will alone supply the cohesive force tobring solidarity to a nation and thus contribute towards world peace. This is thebasic idea underlying self-sufficiency programme.

### STANDARD OF LIVING

For the reasons already discussed it becomes imperative that the daily life ofthe people should be so regulated as to enable them to express theirpersonality. What we eat, wherewith we are clothed and what manner of liveswe lead, all have a bearing, not only on our own lives, but also, On the futureof mankind. Just as each person expresses himself through the scale of valueshe uses so also his manner Of living will expresses his personality. To do this  there should be norms for all people to adhere to, and these norms orstandards must be arrived at from purely objective considerations calculated toafford every person that opportunity in full measure that is needed to developall faculties and thereby his personality. The suggested norm of standard shouldrelate not only to physical and material needs but also to all those innumerableitems that go to enrich and ennoble life and raise it above the level of mereexistence. Of course, it will naturally deal with food that is required tomaintain a level of human performance with adequate medical aid, withclothing that will not only cover nakedness but will also afford room for anexpression of art and beauty, with education which will widen and brighten lifewhile developing the inherent faculties with congenial work that will open upopportunities, for the creative propensities of man and with all such otheraccessory facilities that will help in the progress both of the individual and thegroup.

Taking the example of dining, whether the meal is taken in Western style or inIndian style there is little difference intuitively. The Indian method of eatinghas advantages of cheapness combined with cleanliness and affords free scopefor one's ideas of art in serving. What s more colourful than a meal served on agreen fresh leaf? The creamy rice or chapattis with yellow dhal, white redchutneys- brown pickles, multicoloured salad of fresh vegetables, redtomatoes, etc., make a pleasing sight to start with; when the meal is over andthe leaves have been removed, only the floor remains to be washed out. Thediners themselves, who eat with their fingers, invariably wash their teeth andrinse their mouths also after meals, which is a most desirable and hygienichabit. But those who use forks and spoons have abandoned this wholesomecustom. The farthest they may go in this direction is to dip their finger tipsdaintily in a finger bowl of water and after moistening their lips wipe them offwith a napkin! Wherein lies the superiority of higher quality of the mostcomplicated Western style? The complex manner of life increases expensewithout any corresponding benefit in cleanliness or art. Therefore, thedistinction is more accurately made by calling the Western method 'complex'and ours 'simple', rather than 'high' and 'low' respectively.  In America home life is being rapidly broken up by false ideas of living beingdisseminated. A couple may live in a flat of one or two rooms with 'laboursaving devices'. The husband will go to work in the morning and so will thewife. Each will have a snack breakfast on the way in some cafeteria, andperhaps, lunch at a factory refreshment bar or grill, and the two will meet inthe evening and have their supper in a restaurant and, if their combinedincome is big enough to sport a car, will go for a drive and visit a cinema andreturn to their rooms to listen into the radio. There is no house-keeping,cooking or other attributes of the home. They will not care to have the botherof having children nor can their 'high' standard of living allow of it. These arethey who are slaving away for the manufacturers who set the 'high' standard soas to have 'hands' readily available for the factories.

The accepted standard of living, besides providing the opportunity for thedevelopment of one's faculties and laying out the method of expressing one'spersonality, should also form a link between the various members of societywhereby the better equipped help the less fortunately placed ones.

In such a manner, everyone of our requirements should be so linked up withlocal production and the life of the people around us as to form a solid well-knit economy. Only then will it lead to permanent, as it will promote healthygrowth without destruction by violence.

Frequently, the standard of life is described in terms of money and materialswithout any reference to the lives of those around us. Such standards areartificial and so are unstable and being super imposed and superficial cannotbe permanent having no root in the very life of the people. If we increaseproductivity of the masses and direct consumption so as to afford a ready localmarket, the standard of living of the people will automatically rise. Such anatural formation of a standard will proclaim the culture and genius of thepeople, and win be permanent being rooted in the life of the people.


## CHAPTER 2

### AGRARIAN ECONOMY AND RURAL RECONSTRUCTION

A nation cannot be independent unless it develops self-sufficiency in its primaryneeds---food, clothing and shelter. Our Agrarian Economy is one which helps usto stand on our own legs, ours has always been an agricultural country and allsuch industries as existed have been concentrated round agriculture.

### INDUSTRY OR OCCUPATION

The American method of producing grains makes agriculture an industry asdistinct from an occupation. We need to make that distinction clear because agreat many of the differences that arise and the methods that are used and theprinciples followed come out of that distinction.

An industry is not concerned with the question whether people are starving inIndia or in any part of the world, its sole concern is to maintain high prices.

Human considerations do not prevail at all. All that is needed is keep down thesupply so that the demand will put-up the prices.

In U.S.A. there is a plentiful supply of land and so they produce for exchangeusing all the wasteful and selfish methods of the Mithaiwala.

### MANURES

Ours is an ancient land with a teeming population. Land requires time torecuperate between crops. The more we extract from the land the longer ittakes to regain its fertility. Our methods of agriculture have, through theexperience Of centuries, reached a stage where production is balanced with itsrecuperative power. If we use the Mithaiwala methods and attempt to exploitthe land to the fullest extent by stimulating it, we shall be exhausting itsfertility faster than its ability to regain itself and finally we shall be turninggood cultivable soil into barren deserts. This is the danger facing our country  should it decide to take to the American methods of cultivation. It is better forus to be content with a smaller crop while remaining within the range ofrecovery of soil fertility. The extent of production is not the only concern butthe balance between production and continued use of land available is also animportant factor. We shall see how the details of the processes involved in thetwo methods lead to widely differing results,Artificial fertilization, according to many scientists, exhausts the soil. Thereare such things as earth worms. These earth worms do a great deal of theagricultural work we need. Our ploughing, weeding, etc., are not so veryimportant operations as the work done by the earth worm. These worms eatthe humus-vegetable matter---in the soil and they turn it inside themselves intoan assimilable type of manure which they throw out. In the act of boring intothe earth, they enable air and water to get through, so that the soil is enrichedby taking certain things from the air and water. Therefore, the earth worms arereally fertilizing the soil, and helping the recuperative process.

But when we use artificial fertilizers, we are not giving these worms thenecessary vegetable matter from which they can get their food. When we go ongiving them chemical fertilizers, they die out as they cannot live on chemicals.

Earth worms require farm yard manure to thrive. Such manure is like staplefood for the soil. While using fertilizers, first, we plough a little bit of land.

When that is exhausted, plough a little deeper, till at last we find that the soilgets caked like a rock as there are no earth worms to loosen the soil. Youcannot use that land afterwards in any way. In India with a limited extent ofland we cannot use this method.

Chemical fertilizers are a drug as distinguished from food. Drugs may benecessary in certain cases. Supposing a fellow is drunk with toddy and hedances, we would not call that energy production. It is an excitement of thenervous system. He will be exhausting himself after a little exertion. The nextmoment he will be rolling in the gutters. That is what happens to the soil whenfertilizers are used. They have a place, of course. If one is ill, doctors comeand give some suitable injection. They give it in very small doses according to  the needs of the case. They examine the patient, particularly the heart, andsee how much the patient could stand and then administer according to theindications in the particular case. The doctors may give quinine for Malaria.

Suppose a patient thinks---"the doctor gives me quinine for Malaria. He wantsme to take 2 or 3 or 5 grains a day. By taking in a lump I must get bettersooner. So I must take a Laddu of quinine and take it "What will happen? Hewill be cured of Malaria, but the germs will die along with him. We can prepareLaddu of wheat and eat it according to the capacity of our digestion, and weshall be the better for it.

Thus fertilizers must be used as medicine and not as staple food and they canonly be used after a careful soil analysis and in prescribed doses for particularpieces of land.

Where a person is looking at the enrichment of the soil from the industrialpoint of view, he does not care two straws for the soil's ultimate condition.

What he wants is big crops and large crops in quantity. He goes on fertilizingand getting crops for a few years. Afterwards he will have to go without them.

In an industry this method can be allowed. In America they have beenwastefully utilizing petrol during the last two wars. At one time they thoughtthat they had got an inexhaustible store of petrol. Today they want other landswhere petrol could be had. This kind of wasteful exhaustion brings one to astate where one wants to impinge on other's property. This greed is a fruitfulsource of violence.

Artificial fertilization is not a thing that India can stand. If it has got to beadministered, side by side with it, you must have chemical analysis of the soilall over the country, and it should be found out where it is necessary and whatis necessary.

There are some fields where Jowar and other things are cultivated. Some Jowarplants may be 10 feet or 12 feet high, while others are stunted. What does itmean? It means that some soils are very good and others are extremely poor.

That poor soil will have to be analysed and given what is necessary. We havenot got in India doctors even for human beings, let alone doctors for soil  analysis. Therefore, it is absurd in India to use artificial fertilization. In Biharand Travancore there are artificial fertilizer factories. The industrialists, likethe Mithaizvala, want to have the money transferred from the pockets of poorriots into their own pockets. Let us not fall a victim to these temptations.

If we analyse these two methods of cultivation the former comes under themother's method of preparing halwa. We have to look after the land just as themother wants to look after the child. The method of dealing with land, oragrarian economy, will have to be shaped according to whether we wish tostimulate the soil and exploit it or feed and use it.

The method of dealing with the land has also several consequences. The "shortterm methods are wasteful. The American cultivation is an industry and not anoccupation as it is in India. The natural development of the farmer, therefore,and his attitude towards his fellowmen differs. The industrialist never botherswho his customers are. The industrialist does not get into touch with theconsumer. The mother's method will have to be centered round the person andhis needs. Even when there is food shortage in India, they are going onincreasing area Virginia tobacco. It is the Mithaizvala method. They areproducing not for food but for money. The same is true of many other things inour economy. It is necessary to decide what we are going to do. Are we goingto have self sufficiency? Or are we going to make a few rich? Erection of a dammeans millions of acres will be brought under cultivation and crores of rupeeswill be spent and as a result thereof electricity will be generated. What is themain purpose? The purpose is to sell electricity. Industrialists are interestedonly in building up the dam. The electricity talk is the salesman's talk and theirrigation of millions of acres is also a salesman's talk. If it is wanted is toirrigate large areas, what is required is to spend small amounts say Rs. 500/- ateach place where erosion is going on or wells are wanted. The villagers willtake care of the rest. The expenses will not be-so great then. The Governmentcan give the villagers materials. This will be a very good method of tackling theproblem with the co-operation of the people. It will develop people intolooking after the Governmental functions also.  There is danger in all such projects. Electricity is not an unqualified blessing.

In South Arcot district electricity generated from the Mettur project was madeavailable. They wanted electric pumps to be used for pumping out water fromwells and tanks. The place was getting absolutely barren. The villagers werecutting down cashew nut trees. They were quite good trees and not diseasedones. On enquiry the people said that they had nothing to eat and they werecutting the trees and making them into charcoal and selling them and getting alivelihood that way. They said that since the giant electric poles had come theycould not cultivate their lands. They said electricity was used for pumping outwater. "They sold electric pumps and all those who had money bought them.

We have no money to buy them. The people who are already rich purchasedthem. They pump the water out; the result is that all the wells that are 30 feetor so deep become dry and the poor people are without water. We used to takeout water with the use of bullocks. Even our tanks have gone dry." The plotswhich looked like land were originally tanks. Formerly when there was noelectric pump, the rich were also cultivating Towar etc. Now they haveconverted the land into garden crops. They are growing all kinds of fruits. Whathappens to these fruits? They go to Bombay, Bangalore, Madras and Calcutta.

So the water is being transferred to Bombay, Bangalore, Madras and Calcuttabecause of the electric pump and the poor people's food has been cut out. Tosave themselves from starving they are cutting down trees and making charcoaland trying to keep body and soul together for a while. Now we see where theMithaiwala economics leads us to! People were cheated and it has resultedultimately in ruining the poor people. We see how this seemingly good schemeruins the people. Therefore, such scheme must be passed by the local peopleand they must understand and analyse the consequences of these things andfind out where they will lead them to and take care that they do not harmthem in any way. We must not be carried away by saying that in America theyare doing this and that, in New Zealand they are doing that, etc., Our methodshave to be fitted to the conditions prevailing in our own land.  AGRICULTURAL PRICESThe prices of agrarian products are not fixed by the producer at present.

Because of conditions over which the farmer has no control, since he has todepend on the monsoon, he has no work for some months in the year. But wehave to provide for his living. We are not including this in the cost ofproduction. Suppose a man manufactures a bicycle. He leaves it in his ShowRoom for 6 months. When he sells it, he calculates the rent charges, puts a bigmargin of profit on it, etc., and sells it at a price based on such a calculation.

All this is charged to the cost of production. So also should be the calculation inthe case of the farmer. The so-called Economists sit down and being to putdown the prices of various things like iron, kerosene, clothing, etc., preparingsome kind of jugglery and they call that a 'price index'. With this they calculatewhat the prices of agricultural products should be and fix the prices with noreference to actual costs. This is done by the Government and the consumerwithout consulting the producer in the matter. Thus the Government and theconsumer together rob the rural population. That is what is happening. Theyactually rob it in this sense that it has no relationship to the actual productioneither. This thing had been done in the British regime and the same thing isgoing on today.

To protect the farmers from exploitation and ensure their needs being met wehave a scheme called 'balanced cultivation.' In order to give the people abalanced diet we calculate how much land is necessary for the population of 10to 15 villages. It will give us a gross idea. Then a survey of the land is made tofind out how many acres can grow wheat and how many acres vegetables andmillets and so on and thus determine how to balance the cultivation. If we areshort in certain things, we may be surplus in certain other things. Suchsurpluses are exchanged for goods in short supply. If there is exchange insurplus there will be no need for any violence or injustice. Violence andinjustice arise out of exchanges which go below the level of self-sufficiency.

This can only be done if we look upon Agriculture us an occupation. If we wantto develop the whole region economically, we require an intelligent use of  land, and cultivation should follow our requirement and exchange what surpluswe have for other things that we require. That is as regards utilization of theland.

### OWNERSHIP

All ownership in land is sinful. Today especially in U.P., Bihar and Bengal wehave a huge Zamindari system which is nothing less than misappropriation ofpublic property. How much of the sunlight belongs to a man? We cannot haveownership in sunlight, air, water, etc. In the same way there can be no morepossession in land, which is God-given social property. It is to be used for thebenefit of the whole society. Just as sunlight, water, air, etc., belong to thecommunity, so also land must belong to the community. It will be let outaccording to one's capacity to use it for social benefit. The ownership in landmust belong to the community. That was our old system also. The villagecommunity owned the land and it was given out to different families forcultivation.

The cultivator who cultivates the land must have full benefit of the yield fromthe land he cultivates and only the surplus must be distributed amongst the restof the people. When this system prevails we shall have distributive justice.

Distribution will have to be according to the needs of the people. We must banprivate exchange of goods except through a controlled agency like the Co-operative Society.

The Co-operative Societies should be the distributing media and not theindividual. The surplus should be handled through some medium where it canbe controlled. In this way production could be equitably distributed.

### LABOUR

Today there is an amount of serfdom among agricultural labour anddehumanizing practices are going on all over the country. We cannot allow thisif our agrarian economy is to follow a rational basis. In Gorakhpur there are  Gobris. What is this Gobris system The Zamindar gives the labourer the right tocollect the cow dung. He washes it and takes the undigested grain of wheatfrom the animal's excreta and that wheat is used for food! It is considered aprivilege for these poor fellows and it is a part of their wages. This is howagricultural labour is being degraded in various ways.

In South India people take a loan of 10 or 15 rupees and work for generationsunder a landlord. In Malabar there are certain types of agricultural labourerswho are used as cattle. The owners send their men for labour in other's fieldsand take the hire. The wages do not go to the people who work but to thelandlords. The same kind of system is prevailing in Gujarat. All these evilpractices are results of making land private property.

The various methods by which land is being exploited today, whether it be inIndia or in the West, have been based on principles that apply to industry. Theprices, the methods used, etc., are all derogatory to human development. Wemust employ the mother's type of approach to these problems, and nobodyshould be able to exploit another for his own advantage. If we keep that inmind we shall develop a satisfactory system.

The feeling has to be created that our agricultural colleges are responsible tokeep the land free from famines. If they do not do that, there is nojustification for maintaining all these colleges. Up till now they have developeddifferent kinds of sugarcanes so that the mills could regularly get supplies everymonth and could work steadily. They have brought about, cross-breedingbetween American cotton and Indian cotton, etc. But the primary need of thevillager is not looked after.

Rights and investments: Land tenures in our country vary from province toprovince and from person to person. Each holder holds under special contracts,Cultivable land is looked upon as investment. This lessens the amount of returnto the workers. In a society every man should be a producer. But people nowhold land as investment only. This is a parasitic economy.

In land the third party right might arise. In this case as in mills the socialinterests are comparatively little. In cultivable fields it is not so. If rice fields  are converted into sugarcane fields the individual interests and the third partyinterest suffer resulting in food shortage.

In addition to landlords there are innumerable intermediaries. There should beno such intermediaries. There should be no owning of land except by those whoactually plough land. The holding of land for exchange produces poverty andlabour troubles.

Social effects: Fear of unemployment induces the scourer to act according tothe wishes of the master, sic human privileges have not yet been understood bye People. Agriculture must be construed a social ervice. Grants must be givento agriculturists for improvements. Such grants must be attached to the land,not to the man who holds it. Society should take into consideration that theland is for the use of the people at large. Loans should be granted on the basisof the needs of the land and not on the credit worthiness of the tiller.

### DIVISION OF PRODUCE

Today the whole of the Government organization is based on revenueconsideration. Governments are getting whatever they can get; they are notgetting what the people can bear. Revenue has to be paid in money by thefarmer. It means that the farmer who gets his income by way of crops will haveto convert it into money at harvest time when prices are low. Governments donot think of the difficulties the poor agriculturists are put to. Payment in kindwill be beneficial to the people. Agricultural labour is also paid in kind. IndeedGovernment may have some difficulties to get kist* in kind. Their difficultiesshould not be the deciding factor. By creation of Multipurpose Co-operativeSocieties the collection of revenue in the villages can be made through themand redistributed according to Government needs in the same villages, Socialjustice will be brought about by receiving revenue in kind.


## CHAPTER 3

### AGRO AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES

There is a confusion of thought, right from the Government of Indiadownwards, in regard to the terms 'Village Industry', 'Cottage Industry' and'Home Industry'. These terms are used more or less loosely. There are points ofdifference between village industry, cottage industry and home industry.

In a 'village industry', production, distribution and consumption are more or lesswithin the village. The potter makes pots not for sale in England, but for use inthe village. His consumer is his next-door neighbour. The number of things heproduces are produced distributed and consumed in the local area. We call thisa village industry."Cottage Industry" only refers to the method of production. In village industrieswe may have a large number of workers but still it will remain a villageindustry. We have in Sanganer and Kanpur the paper industry. A number ofpeople may be working, but it is a village industry. Take for instance sandal-wood and ivory carving. Here the production is in the cottage. The consumptionmay be anywhere in Paris, London or New York. Often cottage industries lendthemselves to exploitation. Their main purpose may be to sell the articlesabroad and get foreign exchange. What does it signify? The cottages are madeto work for the consumption of consumers anywhere. Ivory and sandal- Woodcarving may be sold outside to get dollars. Who wants dollars? It is the bigcapitalists who want dollars for heavy machinery and equipment of that nature.

It is one means of diverting the income that should be spent in the village toserve the purposes of capitalists. In a cottage industry distribution andconsumption may be on a worldwide basis.'Home Industries' are carried on by home makers, who are generally women, fortheir home purposes. Embroidery work and a certain amount of knitting andneedle work, preserves like jam, pickle and papads, etc. Such maybe termed  home industries.

### PURPOSE

In village industries there is possibility of human development for the workerhimself. It places him on his merit. He has to be resourceful and, therefore, hedevelops; but in large scale industries very often initiative is destroyed. Westudy the consumer. We look after the customers' convenience. What are wereally doing? Ultimately we are really destroying the little ingenuity that maybe left in every one of us. Cigarette tins have inside them little card boardslips. When the lid is opened and the slip is pulled up, the first cigarette comesout and thus the packing is loosened. Because of that, smokers will purchasethat particular brand. We see large advertisements of self-winding wristwatches. Men have got so demoralized that they have not got the energy towind the watches! Some maker of self-winding watches is advertising that whenyou shake your hand this way or that, the watch automatically gets wound!A great many things are supposed to be made for convenience, but ultimatelythey are destroying their source fullness of the consumer and encouraginglaziness. The more the manufactures study consumers' convenience, the morethe latter become lazy. This is done to enslave the consumer. Ultimately, itmeans that a lot of our energy is diverted to various other things, on which weneed not spend it. Take for instance shaving. Before the safety-razor came, theold type of open razor made in Hamburg or England was sold for Rs. 3/8/-. Itcould last for over forty years. We can calculate how many shaves it can givefor Rs. 3/8/-. Such razors are now known as 'cut-throat razors'. Because of thename, nobody wants to purchase such now. These are all tricks of the trade tocapture the consumer and keep him going. To sharpen the safety-razor blade,they give a definitely shaped piece of glass on which it can be sharpened. Witha little more resourcefulness only a bottle may be made to serve the purpose.

These sharpeners are sold and lazy minded men fall into the trap set for them.

The more they use these devices the more lazy they become. Business todayruns on lines calculated to make man more and more lazy. They are called  labour-saving devices. They really mean more labour for the person who istaking advantage of it.

In England they used to have a day in the week when the poor women of thelocality would come and beat the carpet of the well-to-do, clean it, and bepaid 18 d. per hour for the work; that used to go towards their living expenses.

Later, labour-saving devices came with vacuum cleaning. As a result these oldwomen, who are now displaced, do not get the 18 d. per hour for that part ofthe work, but the labour of vacuum cleaning has been shifted to the shouldersof the householder. It is all topsy-turvy.

When we plead village industries, it is not primarily for making work for otherpeople but as a means of self- expression. It helps one to grow. If it does not doit, it is not useful. The artisan's self-expression must be the same as that of theartist. The artist paints on a canvas say worth Rs. 5/- and uses paint worth Rs.5/-. Altogether he spends Rs. 10/r. But the painting may sell for hundreds oreven thousands of rupees. Why? It is for the personality of that artist which isprojected into his work. On the other hand take lithograph. On all -mill clothsbeautiful pictures of Saraswati and Lakshmi are to be seen. We can producesuch pictures on a large scale, but there is no personality, and the artist is notrepresented there. The real art comes where we project ourselves in certainthings, and cottage industries give us that opportunity, and every good cottageindustry worker takes an interest in the work he does himself.

The Khadi programme was directed to bringing about a certain amount of non-violence and truth in our own lives. Originally, as we have noted already,England was an animal-centered economy and horses provided the motiveforce. Then steam took the place. They invented weaving mills and spinningmills run by steam, and began to produce articles in a large measure, and,therefore, it was necessary to produce more cotton for the textile mills. At thattime India -was sending out beautiful Dacca muslins and other cotton fabrics toLondon. England imposed protective duties. Round about Manchester cottondoes not grow. Between the short staple cotton and the long staple cotton,there is a great difference. For hand spinning, short staple cotton, as is grown  in India, will do. The machine needs long staple cotton because of the highspeed at which the spindle rotates. The strength of the mill cloth dependslargely on the twist. As Manchester expended she wanted to have more andmore cotton. The Southern States of America, it was thought, would producethe needed quality and quantity of cotton. Many of the settlers there were ofBritish origin. Britain got them to cultivate the long staple cotton. TheBritishers are not fond of working in the hot sun, especially in tropical climates.

In the southern states of America the climatic conditions are not very good, butare much the same as are found in the northern parts of India. Hence, they hadto get slave labour for field work. That gave an impetus for the Negro slavetrade. When we use American cotton we see how we would become a party tothat slavery, which is an immoral thing. This went on merrily for some time tillabout the middle of the last century when Abraham Lincoln raised his voiceagainst slave trade. The Southern States said that they would not forego slavelabour as their standards of living would go down, and that they were lookingafter the slaves very well and all that kind of arguments that we see now in thetrusteeship idea. War was declared between the Northern States and theSouthern States. The cotton had been hitherto transported over to Manchesterby the Northern States. Now they refused to do so. Cotton export toManchester was stopped. Manchester had spent lakhs of rupees on themachinery. They thought that cotton should be produced somewhere else. TheNorthern parts of the Punjab were on the same latitude as of the SouthernStates' of America. So they thought that such cotton could be produced in Indiaalso. By this time the British had got hold of the political power from the EastIndia Company. They began to carry on researches in cotton. That was thegenesis of the establishment of the Agricultural Colleges in India under thepretext of developing India. They carried on crores of rupees worth ofexperiments. Who paid for these researches? India bore the expenses andManchester got the benefit of the researches.

When long staple cotton was produced in the Punjab, it had to be sent toManchester. Then the Railways were developed again under the plea of  developing India. Who benefited by the railways? The Manchester people didwithout paying the cost.

Cotton had to be carried to Liverpool, Manchester, etc. They sent it roundCeylon, through the Red Sea and the Mediterranean route, etc. It called forpolicing the high ways. How did they do it? By having naval bases inTrincomalee in Ceylon, Aden in the Red Sea and Port said in the Mediterraneanetc. All these were fortified. Who paid for these? Not the Manchester millowner but the general taxpayer.

Under the circumstances will the product be cheaper? Undoubtedly, becausethe research expenses transport, etc., were borne by the Indian tax-payer andto a certain extent by the British tax-payer. To the producer it will be cheapbecause of the costs borne by somebody else. That was why mill-made cloth iseven today cheaper than Khadi. But there is dishonesty in it, In the whole ofthis history there is violence and untruth. It was nothing else but a nationalrobbery. Therefore, Gandhiji held that even if we had to go naked. We oughtnot to touch such goods. If we benefited by such economy we became partiesto the robbery.

There is a moral force behind this movement towards village industry. We canunderstand why combined with the political programme, this Khadi base gaveus a very good opportunity for the national movement and that was the reasonwhy Gandhiji started with Khadi as the chief item of the programme. "Ply theCharkha and win Swaraj". What does it mean? It means ultimately that weunderstand the implications of that wheel, the Charkha. The progress fromuntruth to truth, the movement from violence to non-violence, must be felt byus.

Because of that the Manchester cloth must have in it certain moral or morecorrectly immoral values which cannot be computed in terms of money. Wereferred to the naval bases, and also the army and the navy. The army and thenavy cost no doubt a great deal; but more than that we have the cost which isnot computable in terms of money. The human lives lost, the blood that hasbeen shed to keep the places clear and safe for purposes of trade---these cannot  be computed. Therefore, the Manchester cloth was dipped in human blood! Wedon't have the spiritual vision to see the blood in the cloth and think it is white.

But to Gandhiji it was red with the marks of human blood. All foreign trade isultimately based on this type of violence.

If we use for everyday consumption the methods of large-scale production westand in danger of being parties to immoral practices. The more and more wedecentralize, the more and more we get into methods which are morally andspiritually on a higher plane. If food, clothing and shelter are needed all theseshould be provided by people who are working through decentralized units. Toa certain extent, it sterilises the robbery, the violence, and to that extent it isgood for the growth of the cultural life of the country. That is the place villageindustries have to fill in the nation.

That does not rule out large-scale industries at all. But knowing the dangers, toget over the evil, we sterilise it by taking away the profit motive, substitutingfor it only the service motive. We draw a line, what should be manufactured bythis method and what should be manufactured by other methods. We removethe chances of the wealthier or the more talented people exploiting themasses, and that is what we need. Decentralised industries have a definiteplace to play in our country, on a greater scale than large-scale industries. Weshould keep large-scale industries under definite control because they are notconducive to the growth of Swaraj, namely, the welfare of the general publicbeing represented in the councils of the nation.

### DEMOCRACY

In large-scale industries this is not possible. Persons at the top are in a positionto control or dictate to the four thousand or five thousand people---the labourforce---their method of living. For example, Tata nagar is in itself an empire. Noindividual has a right to rule over 4,000 to 5,000 men. Large-scale industriesare highly undemocratic while village industries develop democracy to agreater extent. Decentralised industry will develop the independence of theman and he will be able to keep his head erect. It ought to play a very  important part in the national life, preparing the people for democracy. Large-scale industries will politically lead to dictatorship. Even the so-calleddemocratic countries like America, Russia etc., became actual dictators underthe stress of war. Wherever a country uses centralized industries for producingthings which are necessary, ultimately it will end up in dictatorship. Democracywill be there only in form to mislead the people. There is hardly any differencebetween Stalin, Roosevelt, Churchill, Hitler or Mussolini. One is as good, or asbad, as the other. They were all dictators, because their countries had taken tothe same method of centralised production. It follows naturally that peopleworking in centralised industries get used to regimentation. This regimentationis not conducive to the growth of democracy. The fuller development of themoral and spiritual elements in man also call for a method of organizationthrough village or decentralised industries. Politically village industries providethe conditions for the development of democracy. To make use of villageindustries is not really going back to savagery unless democracy is savagery, butleads to civilization and culture, bringing out man's dignity and hisindependence and taking him out of the slavery of his own fellow men.

Today many of us are slaves financially. These financial difficulties are reallymill-stones that are put round our necks by the people at the top. If we developourselves on the basis of individual farming or individual village industry, wecan be independent. The higher the so-called standard of living, the stronger isthe tightening of the rope of subservience round us. We shall not have themoral strength to stand up for principles. High standard of living brings us tothis. The larger and larger the unit, the greater becomes our slavery. If wewant to have the moral political and spiritual problems solved, the only way isto be independent in our economic activity and we must resort to methods ofproduction which will bring about such a state of affairs.


## CHAPTER 4

### INDUSTRIAL ECONOMY

There is a false notion that industrialization is an easy means for any country'sadvancement. We must always learn from history. History is an unmistakablerecord of past events. As the saying goes "history repeats itself". If we take thesame steps we shall land ourselves in the same predicament. When early in thecentury in the great war between Russia and Japan, the later won, there wasrejoicing that an oriental nation had come up to the top. Within our ownlifetime we have seen Japan disappearing from the face of the earth as a bigpower. Why? Industrialization has not saved it. It has not saved any country. Atthe present moment, America appears to be at the top. There .

Is no knowing when she will also go under Violence creates unstable equilibrium. We cannotdepend on it. The next moment somebody else becomes more violent and theerstwhile lords of the earth disappear. The idea that large-scale industries willsave us is wrong. Industrialization is only indispensable if the country's economyis based on violence and is not calculated to meet its daily requirements. In ourcountry it is absolutely wasteful. It is far too expensive for us to indulge in it.

To equip the Army, or Navy or Air Force, industrialization is needed. Theycannot do without them. If we want non-violence, large-scale industries areuneconomical for producing consumption goods only.

### EFFICIENCY

For instance, one of the things that we use largely is paper. We can make paperby hand as well as by machinery. Which is the most economical method ofdoing it from the point of view of the best utilization of natural resources?Supposing we make paper from bamboos. What do the mill paper makers do?They have hundreds of acres of bamboos grown and they cut the tenderbamboo. They put it in the mill and the paper is delivered at the other end.

That is their method of doing it. It necessitates the cultivation of bamboo like  the cultivation of sugarcane. The mill method of production is similar to themithaiwala's method.

How do we produce it by hand? We don't have any forest cultivated forhandmade paper out of bamboo. We go round and collect broken bamboobaskets, old mats, etc- out of waste heaps. It is frequently from rotten thingsthat handmade paper is made.

Take the utilization point of view. Bamboo is produced from the earth. In thecase of the mill, it goes direct from the cultivated soil and comes out as paper.

In the case of the handmade paper we do not cultivate bamboo. It is grownwild in the jungle. These bamboos are brought and baskets, etc. are made outof them. They are used and they last for five to ten years. We have the use ofthe bamboo for all these years. When it gets rotten, it is thrown away. After itis thrown away, we convert it into paper. Which is the better utilization ofresources of these two methods? The second method naturally, because we getseveral years use out of the bamboo and when it becomes useless, we make useof it again for paper. We notice how wasteful it is to make paper by the firstmethod.

In Norway and Sweden they have vast forests and they make paper from woodpulp. In our country this is machinery. Which is the most economical method ofdoing it from the point of view of the best utilization of natural resources?Supposing we make paper from bamboos. What do the mill paper makers do?They have hundreds of acres of bamboos grown and they cut the tender bamoo.

They put it in the mill and the paper is delivered at the other end. That is theirmethod of doing it. It necessitates the cultivation of bamboo like thecultivation of sugarcane. The mill method of production is similar to themithaiwala's method.

How do we produce it by hand? We don't have any forest cultivated forhandmade paper out of bamboo. We go round and collect broken bamboobaskets, old mats, etc- out of waste heaps. It is frequently from rotten thingsthat handmade paper is made.  Take the utilization point of view. Bamboo is produced from the earth. In thecase of the mill, it goes direct from the cultivated soil and comes out as paper.

In the case of the handmade paper we do not cultivate bamboo. It is grownwild in the jungle. These bamboos are brought and baskets, etc. are made outof them. They are used and they last for five to ten years. We have the use ofthe bamboo for all these years. When it gets rotten, it is thrown away. After itis thrown away, we convert it into paper. Which is the better utilization ofresources of these two methods? The second method naturally, because we getseveral years use out of the bamboo and when it becomes useless, we make useof it again for paper. We notice how wasteful it is to make paper by the firstmethod.

In Norway and Sweden they have vast forests and they make paper from woodpulp. In our country this is not possible. In our country, we cannot afford tohave our land put to that kind of use. The bulk of our handmade paper is madeout of waste material. We make paper out of jute. Where does it come from?We do not import it from Eastern Pakistan or any other place like that. We gethold of old gunny bags that have been used, cut them up, boil them withcaustic soda, reduce them to pulp and make paper. Looking at the utilization ofnature's gift, or production, we see that handmade methods are superior to themethods of mills.

In many respects, handmade things also lead to all round benefit which we donot get from mill-made things. Take, for example, soap. The factories bringcaustic soda from some large chemical companies and with that caustic sodathey mix up oil and by using different processes they manufacture soap. It isnot creation but a transformation of the caustic soda.

We also make cottage soaps. We do not buy any caustic soda. Our boys go afterthe rains, about January or so to fields and collect the Sajjimitti available fromthe surface of the earth. The boys remove this alkaline earth from the surface,which makes the soil better for cultivation. We bring that sediment into ourplace, extract Soda Carbonate and prepare soap out of it adding slaked lime,water etc. We add Ghani oil or such other oil which does not compete with the  people's food. Our agriculture is the better for this method of soap making andwe utilize oils which are available for purposes other than eating. Thus our soapmaking forms a part of our economic order. Everywhere we have got to link upthese things. Large-scale industries often stand alone and are unrelated to therest of the economic organization.

### POWER

The use of power also may lead towards non-violence or violence, truth oruntruth, according as we resort to current economy or to reservoir economy.

Let us start from the very simplest source; the primary source of powergenerally is man. We have a wealth of man power and that man power must beused as widely as we possibly can. We should try to reduce everything possibleto man power.

In the Punjab there is a great deal of water power, used for grinding cereals.

There is a vessel where the seed is placed. The grinding stone is roated bywater power at night and the atta is ready by the morning. It works practicallywithout any cost. The only cost is that of making the wooden wheel requiredfor the water to rotate the stone. From human power we come to naturalpower, namely water power. We have at our disposal an unending supply ofwater power at a very cheap rate. It can be utilized for making paper pulp,grinding atta or even generating electricity for a limited use.

Large amount of power was generated in the past by the use of wind mills.

There are several such mills even today. It is one method of obtaining power.

Wind mills cost about Rs. 700 or 800 each.

Power costs more as we go further and further from man power. It will not beeasily available for poor people. Monopolies are, therefore, likely to becreated.

We then come from nature to animal power. We have all kinds of animate---bullocks, donkeys, horses, camels, and even elephants---available to people in  India, Thus, we have manpower, water power, wind-mill power, animal power---all are indigenous.

In India our dependence on the bullock power makes dairying an indispensibleindustry, not only for food such as milk, ghee etc., but also for manures andbullocks. We are familiar with the bullock. In Italy too they use bullocks forploughing. In Northern countries they use horses. Horse power has been thecommon, factor even in western countries until recently for ploughing etc. Insandy deserts they use camels. The camel is a very convenient animal becauseof its stupidity. It goes on working once started till it is stopped. Elephants aresources of great power in our country. They are largely used in timber yards.

Elephants can be used for clearing waste lands and jungles and bringing themunder cultivation. Elephants may be used in the place of tractors. They canturn out much of the work that the tractors do. The elephants are almosthuman in their intelligence. But they cannot be kept in areas where there arenot plenty of trees. It would cost about 30 rupees a day to feed an elephant. Ina jungle we can afford to keep them. In such places we can utilize elephantpower as far as available. In Rangoon and Travancore they are using elephantsfor timber lifting. Thus we can make use of these various powers right downfrom doing things with our own hands to the power that elephants provide.

We have got also to see that all things of primary necessities come out of ourown country. Unless we do that there is a tremendous danger of our being lefthigh and dry when the time of conflict comes.

### TRACTORS

There is a great deal of talk about tractor cultivation. If we scrutinise it weshall see the danger. A clever Director of Agriculture was enthusiastic abouttractor cultivation. He wanted to convert all our agriculture into tractorcultivation. Tractors run on petrol or crude oil which are imported stuffs.

Supposing a world war comes on, where from shall we get crude oil or petrol? Itis perilous to depend on imported motive power for our food production.  There is another difficulty with tractors at the present time. Though themachines are available they cannot be serviced. They need a service station. Ifyou want to use them in India, your must have the necessary service stations. Itinvolves a certain stage of development of our economic organization.

Therefore, we must have power according to the nature of the circumstancesunder which we are working.

### ELECTRICITY

We may have even electricity to a certain extent. If we want to use electricitywe have got to be very cautious. We have seen how the electric power used inthe south Arcot district eventually resulted in the water from the villages beingvirtually exported to places like Madras, Bombay, Bangalore and other cities inthe form of fruits and the villagers being left without water. We have to seehow we introduce it and whether its introduction will bring about the welfareof the people or ruin them. If we want to introduce pumps we should do so onlywhere water is available. In the South Arcot district, 94 per cent of the rainfallwent to the sea, and 6 percent only was retained in the ground. By this processof electric pumping, we are reserving that 6 per cent for those who have andare taking it away from those who have not. It is a predatory system ofeconomy; it is pick-pocketing. We tap only the 6 per cent water. Real workmust be to reserve and conserve a large part of the 94 per cent of water whichruns to the sea. We do not worry about it, because conserving would meanirrigation works which would not put money into businessmen's pockets. Ifelectric pumps etc. are sold, the businessmen get commissions. The realobjective should be to capture the rain and harness it. If the water level can beraised and utilized for irrigation purposes, it is best. If we use it for predatorypurposes, it is immoral and criminal.

We must be able to judge everything on these lines. A certain thing may bevery good in itself but when used in a wrong way it may prove dangers. Therewas a child of 3 years of age. The mother was cooking. The child went to thecupboard and discovered a small bottle. He pulled out the cork and put one pill  out of it into his mouth. It was a sugarcoated pill. Finding the pill sweet thechild went on swallowing the pills one after another till he had swallowedabout 20 pills. They were quinine pills! Soon after the child fell down inconvulsions and before the doctor could be brought, life became extinct.

Similarly power is a dangerous weapon to be put into everybody's hand.

In a certain province the Government wanted to introduce electricity toelectrify the handlooms in village. They did it with the best of intentions.

There were a thousand weavers in the village. After two years of theintroduction of electricity, many weavers had given their profession and othershad left the village. It had brought about the dispersal of the population. Whathad happened was like this. There is a beautiful car, with powerful engine etc.,and by the side there is a bullock- cart with two fine bullocks. What wouldhappen if we take away the two bullocks and transfer and fit the fine engine todrive the bullock cart? The engine can run at 60 miles per hour, but it will notform a combination with the cart.

They were formerly using the handloom for the manufacture of sarees andproduced a saree a week. They may make 50 sarees a year. Each saree wouldcost Rs. 50/-or so. Each weaver required a certain amount of capital to buy thenecessary silk yarn to make the sarees. The sarres were manufactured for themarriage season. During the marriage season everything would be sold out.

When they electrified the looms competition began amongst the weavers. Eachone began to manufacture in large quantities say about 200 sarees. They had todispose of them. The market had not expanded 200 times as the marriageseason could not also be increased 200 times! These sarees were manufacturedin large quantities and were sold at cheap rates to merchants and financiers.

The weavers spent away the money and for a major portion of the yearafterwards they had absolutely nothing to do. A great many became labourers.

That is what had happened by electrification of hand-looms. It only broughtdestruction to many. People's understanding of their resources and getting usedto a certain sense of speed are necessary developments and prerequisites ifpower is to be used. We are unable to adjust ourselves to the great speed  which leads to financial and nervous breakdown. We have got to considerwhether a life of this tremendous pressure is necessary in our land. In our owncountry our needs are few.

A technical school was teaching carpentry. It was fitted with electricmachinery. The manager was proud of the teaching, and his equipment. Thetrainees were all village boys and they were taught to use all those machines.

In the Show Room there were beautiful dressing tables, wardrobes, rose wood,carved work, sandal wood work, etc. The boys did not know even how to usethis type of furniture. There was a very good market for these in England. Thisschool was exploiting child labour for supplying cheap furniture to London. Thestudents in the end did not know how to construct even a bullock-cart. What isthe use of such education.

The boys' education must be co-ordinated to their own life. We ought to makethem resourceful under the conditions of life in which they are going to live.

We have got to be careful that their education is useful to the people in theirown villages. The more we take to mechanical power, the less will it stand us ingood stead in times of necessity.

This is the way things are being done today piecemeal. We are going to build upa wonderful Navy based on petrol and crude oil which fuel we will have to getfrom our enemies! If we have a Navy of gun boats which runs on crude oil and ifa conflict arises with America or England, the oil supply will be cut off. Thesenaval powers are those with whom we may happen to come into conflict. Itwould be folly on our part to expect our enemy power to supply us steel,petrol, etc., to fight them in return. We must base our economic order on suchthings which we ourselves possess and use them in such a mariner as wouldbenefit us in the long run.

### PUBLIC UTILITIES

Are telegraphs, telephones, aero planes and other amenities essential? Therailways have not been an unmixed blessing. It is doubtful if they have been  even a mixed blessing. They have been largely responsible for creatingfamines. When we analyse the evils that have been caused by railways we shallfind that the famines have been increasing considerably within the railway era.

Formerly in villages two or three years' paddy used to be kept before anythingwas sent to the market. When the railways came, they drained away all thesereserves and hence the present famines are artificial ones.- In the old days,they were due to natural causes such as failure of rains. Today they are due toconditions made by man, especially by the instrumentality of the railways.

Railways have been instrumental in converting our country into a raw materialproducing country. If we want to have such means of transport, have them byall means. But they must be worked under proper safeguards.

Certain things may be used, but used like poison, under control and in thehands of specialists. Key industries and large-scale industries, must be underthe control of the Government. By and large, the people should use indigenouspower that is easily available to them. When electricity is available everywhereand we have got adjusted to the tempo of that kind of activity then we may useit. But when we are not adjusted to it, we may suffer from it.

The question whether to use power or not must be taken in conjunction -withthe local circumstances. It is very difficult to lay a hard and fast rule in allthese matters. We must not be enamored of high power machines. The dangercomes when we forget the circumstances prevailing [n the country. If thebenefit is not available to everyone in the country, it would lead to a conditionin which partial monopolies will result.

### DIFFUSION

At the moment there is a great interest evinced in the way Japan is usingpower. The system is claimed to be one of decentralization. It is reallydiffusion of production. Instead of being concentrated in towns, it is diffusedall over. There is a greater exploitation of human beings than in the citycentered production. It is a subtle way of exploitation we are not sure whetherwe shall be able to stand it in India. There are possibilities of greater  exploitation by diffusion of the centers than under concentrated production,When industries are diffused we are not aware of their actual conditions ofworking and believe that they are independent producers. To produce amarketable article the workers are dependent on some central organization.

They will not be able to be independent at any time; the whole economy iscentred on the material production rather on human welfare.

Whether we use power or not, will ultimately depend on these variousconsiderations. We have studied briefly the question---whether to use powerand if so, what sort of power to use, and have seen in what cases power will bebeneficial and in what cases power may be harmful to us. Tractors, petrol etc.,being of the reservoir economy, will lead to violence in the end.

The bullock, cow, horse etc., give us power and also manure. A man had200 acres of land. One tractor salesman who had a tractor of 200 horse powerwith him wanted to show the landowner of 200 acres how a tractor couldplough the land in a few days. He said he would get the land ploughed in ashort time, and after the land had been ploughed he came and told the farmerthat the land had been completely ploughed and wanted him to see it forhimself. The man went and saw and asked him where he had put the 200 horsesdung! The tractor was of 200 horse power and, therefore, there should be dungof 200 horses. Then he said he wanted, not only the ploughing of the land, butalso manure. Our cattle are fertilizing factories as well as power generatingunits. We cannot get things piecemeal like power from one place, manure fromanother place, etc. We have got to organize our economy all round. Only thenit could be called a system. It is a misnomer to call the Western economy asystematic organization, because it is all piecemeal. The various units of theeconomy must be coordinated.

Great Britain came in for a terrible crisis in 1940-41 because she was dependenton foreign countries for food. In that little island there may be an excuse forhaving this kind of organization as it is a small country. Most things they have toget from outside. The things they have there are coal, iron and steel, and they  cannot live on them, and, therefore, they may be dependent on othercountries.

We are thinking in terms of our own country, which is a vast country withvarious resources available, and, therefore, there is no excuse on our part tobring in things from outside when we can develop them ourselves. From ourown resources we can produce almost everything. There is no such thing aswaste at all, one dovetails into the other. What is waste in one case becomesraw material in the second. We must develop our economy on that basis and itis possible in India, though it may not be possible in other countries.

Industrialization may be wasteful under the conditions under which we areplaced.

### WORK

All actions have their reactions. We must not think in terms of materialproducts, only. Work is a thing which has to be analysed and the good it, bringsus ascertained. If it does not do us any good, we need not work at all. In theBible it was said---"By the sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat bread." Man says thathe would not sweat but at the same time eat. 'He makes somebody else sweatand he eats.

Work has two constituents---the disciplinary part and the creative or pleasurablepart. The great Empires of Babylon etc. deprived man of his primary possession,namely freedom. They made the slaves sweat and the slave owners enjoyed thefruits of that labour. The work part of it the slaves did and the pleasurable partthe lords enjoyed. What was the result? A person requires exercise to keep hisbody fit. Similarly also all works give us exercise for various faculties todevelop. If we take away all work---the disciplinary aspect---man willdeteriorate. The old civilizations died out because men did not work andculturally deteriorated. If we separate the disciplinary side and the culturalside, we shall deteriorate. The slaves deteriorated because they drudged allthe time and the lords deteriorated because they did only the enjoying part of  it. The two things should go together. All work or all play is not good foranybody.

Under the old feudal system the lords lived in the castles and the serfscultivated the soil. That system also has crumbled in course of time.

They devised another method of bringing slavery through the possession orcontrol of instruments of production. We have the capitalistic system. On topof this we have, even to this day, the position of whole nations held underslavery, politically. This is called imperialism. The slave or colonial constituentsproduce raw materials, while the empire country enjoys a higher standard ofliving. This also ultimately spells destruction.

England today is in the dark ages. Although materially during the Victorianperiod she might be said to have had a fair amount of prosperity, culturally itwas the darkest age. In literature, music, art, architecture etc., England's bestperiod was during the Elizabethan period which the British called dark ages. Asindustries came on, its culture went down and when culture went down, itdeteriorated into a third Tate power. In the Victorian age she continued to be apowerful factor because of her previous foundations.

### DEVELOPMENT OF PERSONALITY

Prof. Cyril Burt, a great psychologist, specialized in intelligence tests, says thatthe research that he has carried on during the last 40 years indicates thatEngland is deteriorating at an alarming rate according to intelligence testscarried out on the younger people. This is understandable from our point ofview. The more we depend on industries the less are the chances for thepeople to develop.

The reaction of industrialization on man is not conducive to his growth. At ashoe factory in Northampton which is a great shoe-making centre a psychologistwas in charge of the personnel. The factory was making men's shoes. There wasan old man who did nothing else but cutting heels to shape. This he had donefor 37 years. He was not even an expert shoemaker after all that time. All the  37 years he had not seen the whole factory. How very destructive is thismethod to human beings? We are a bundle of nerves. We have to study, work,play, laugh, etc. for our growth. Work is to our higher faculties what food is tothe physical body. The occupation we follow should contribute towards thegrowth of our personality.

Modern countries, like America, which have studied these things carefully arealso providing for laughter! The Americans in their own way have a separatetime for laughter. In their amusement parks there is a place where all thechairs are electrified. When people sit on them and the switch is on, the chairsbang against each other and then there is a peal of laughter from theoccupants. After a hard day's labour when nerves are frayed, they relax likethis. This is their system of division of labour.

If we project this approach to work into dietetics what will happen? Thedifferent things that are needed for eating are purchased, and cooked andserved. Our own method of eating is to put the different items of food in theleaf and eat them. According to the division of labour of centralized industries,it would need specialization. It would require one person to drink all the ghee,one person to eat all the rice, etc. Each man will do only one specified process.

The result of such a division of labour in dietetics will be that all the partakerswill die. The method is. Totally unsuited for human beings.

In decentralized industries it is different. There was a school master who wasgetting Rs. 40/- per mensem and he was making caps to supplement hisincome. He was asked to demonstrate cap making. He brought his work basket.

There was some plush like cloth. This was obtained from Italy. Another Satinlike cloth he bought from Japan. Some eyelets were from Birmingham. He tooksome newspapers and cut them out into electrical shape. He cut out the Satinlooking cloth and worked some designs on the sewing machine. The commercialfaculties of the teacher were at work when he purchased the different articleshe needed for making the cap. Then his economic faculties came into play,then his artistic talents and so on. Meanwhile the child in his back yard cried.

He left everything, criticized his wife roundly and said that when distinguished  visitors had come she should not have allowed the child to cry. Here we notice,was a complete digression and recreation. So the various parts of man got acertain amount of work or expression in different ways including a quarrel withthe wife. This way cottage industry provides scope for all the faculties of man.

Industrialization is not conducive to the growth of the whole man and his fulldevelopment as a personality. Work has its reaction on mind and that is verymuch more important than the material manifestation of work. Our emphasismust be, not on the material things we produce, but on the opportunities tomake people grow. That is the basis of the new system of education thatGandhiji has developed. Gandhiji's scheme of education is based on hisphilosophy of work. The present system of education is to pump informationinto children's heads. In the final analysis it is not real education. Character isnot developed but persons so educated go about like an encyclopedia of knowledge.

Our standard of living must be one which gives us an opportunity to express thehighest in us, and should not be the result of a multiplicity of wants that arebeing created artificially. This latter does not make for a higher standard ofliving. It is a misnomer to call multiplicity of wants a high standard of living.

Compare Churchill and Gandhiji. Gandhiji had certain values. His thoughts werefixed on higher things. That is the higher standard which distinguishes us fromthe animals. Churchill goes about with a Cigar in his mouth indicating values ofindulgence. That may be a complex standard of living but certainly not a highstandard of living. There is a complex standard and there is a high standard.

Gandhiji's was simple but a high standard, whereas Churchill's is complex but alow standard, comparatively speaking. Service is a higher ideal, while power isa lower one. Working for power is a low standard.

Psychologically the industrialists attempt to make a good market by paradingthis material standard of living. They set before the people a fashion to beblindly followed. The extent to which people follow that fashion, it makes forbusiness. If industrialists can change fashions, new things could be made and agood market is created. Industrialists flourish on the folly of t customers.  Sitting on the floor and eating from the plantain If does not form a lowstandard of living. We do not ha even to wash the plantain leaf; we simplythrow it away. If we eat with forks and spoons it means a good amount of workto clean and wash etc. We are getting more and more complex today. We havegot to make a distinction between what is a higher standard of living and whatis lower standard of living. From this point of view of simple life,industrialization is not necessary for a high standard of life.

We have seen that from the point of view of the method of production,industrialization is wasteful. From the point of view of the growth of humanbeings industrialization is a hindrance. Human beings become mere machines.

The articles that they produce are no often necessary for us. If we do not thinkthat a high standard of living consists in having a multiplicity o wants, thenindustrialization is not called for to promote a high standard of life.

There are certain things for which large-seal industries may be used. We do notadvocate that this should be wiped out altogether. They will be used onlynecessary evils. If we want quick transportation; becomes a necessary evil.

Industrialization is an evil. We may put up with it in certain cases. In our lifewe teal food and also poison. We may have industrialization; we should put theindustrial products in cupboards and label them as poison. Then we shall usethem under proof controls. Large-scale industries must be under state controland not under private ownership and run not for profit but only run on a servicebasis. We organise a system in which there will be room for large-scaleindustries also. We must decide for what things they are necessary. They mustform a controlled section of our economic order, while small-scale industriesare left free, just as staple foods, are not to be normally under controls, whilemedicines, especially poisonous ones, have to be. In the industrial sector of oureconomic order, we have to put large-scale industry in juxtaposition, andcentralized industries should be used only wherever necessary. They should beused for a certain restricted purpose, and not for making money by individualsand flooding the country with unnecessary things.


## CHAPTER 5

### SOCIALISM, COMMUNISM AND GANDHIAN ECONOMY

Many of these 'isms' are forms of organizations meant for common good. At itsbest and when superficially looked at Communism does not appear to aim atanything less than what Gandhism does. But there is a world of difference inthe means. On the material level there might not be much apparent difference,but we must judge not merely from the material level, but also from the moral,the spiritual and the social level. On the material and on the social level theymay appear almost equal. When we come to the application of moral andspiritual values, we begin to bifurcate. Even at the social level, they are notquite equal. Socialism and Communism think of the nation as one unit, India'strade is not one unit. It is made up of Birlas, Tatas, Dalmias and aninnumerable number of other such persons. When we talk in terms of Indiantrade or Indian wealth, we are not referring to homogeneous things. We areconcerned with individuals and not India as a whole. There is no such thing asIndia apart from the human beings composing it. There are human being also inAmerica, in England and in every other country. Our outlook must be universal.

There is a great deal of difference in this between Gandhism and Socialism.

While in England, even Indians must eat the food that is grown there, becausewe plead for self-sufficiency. It makes little difference whether it is India orEngland. Imported food we should not eat; as political frontiers lead toconflicts foreign trade is often based on violence. We are human beings and notideological units. Our attitude is not one of nationalism. The group has noexistence without the units, In that way socialism is somewhat circumscribedand communism too. They have a certain limited ideology.

Gandhism aims at the development of the human being. It does not matter howmany chairs and tables we have got in our house. Communism emphasises thematerial welfare at all costs. Other human beings may be subjugated. StateSocialism looks upon all human beings as only living for the State, while underthe Gandhian conception State is an instrument for the benefit of every  individual. He should develop spiritually, morally and economically. In so far aswe are aiming at material welfare, there can be no difference betweencommunism and socialism and Gandhism. The difference comes where weinfuse moral values. As an individual every person has a moral responsibility.

When a social plan appeals to our higher nature and to our conception ofspiritual and moral standards, it is all right. If it does not, we may withdraw.

That is where non-co-operation fits in.

But in Socialism or Communism we have got to do and toe the line that isplaced before us. The State or the Society is supreme. In our case theindividuals are spiritual beings and the State is there to help to realize theindividual's personality. The emphasis we lay is primarily moral and spiritual.

Even if our material welfare is not catered for, it does not matter. Even bicycleriding may be an act that supports warfare. The armament factories are runduring war time, to make tanks and other armaments and munitions. Whenthey are not so engaged during the so-called peace time, the machinery wouldbecome rusted. So at such times, they make only a certain amount ofarmaments and are otherwise utilised in producing something for the market.

They turn their attention to supplying other universal wants e.G., bicycle. When we buy a Rs. 200/- worth B.S.A. bicycle, we are paying part of the warexpenses to keep that armament factory going. That is a consideration underGandhism, but not under Socialism or Communism.

### REGIMENTATION

In the Gandhian order of things there is room also for some regimentation.

Gandhiji wants everybody to spin; there is regimentation; but it is voluntary.

We spin one hour every day as part of our discipline. That is active cooperation,with the ideal that is set before us.

Under Socialism they may want to socialise large-scale industries. There, as wehave seen, men are made part of the machine so that production may be keptup. They want to reckon in terms of material results. Gandhiji's ideal is tocalculate in terms of individual expression. Some persons may be of a higher  type and some of the lower. If the person is of a higher quality, he should helpthe men in the lower stages. We have to count ourselves as one family. There isneither white, black nor brown; neither Chinese, nor Japanese. Theseconsiderations do not come in. It is not because an article is produced by Japanthat we do not want to use it. In the case of the widespread boycott after theBengal partition, we boycotted all things that were British. That boycott maybe all right under socialism or communism. That was founded on hatred andwas basically political. Ultimately it will lead to violence. Under the Gandhianorder, if we refrain from using a foreign article it is because we do not knowanything of the article and cannot assess its value and the conditions underwhich it was produced so far away. If we burn kerosene oil we become a partyto Burmese slavery, as Burma, where the oil comes from, was subjugated toexploit her resources. Such boycott is non-violent. We may call it non-violentSwadeshi spirit. After the Bengal partition Swadeshi was violent Swadeshi. TheGandhian programme which refrains from getting foreign goods is non-violentSwadeshi.

In this way in every act of ours we shall notice that the considerations thatweigh are moral and spiritual as against purely material or political; and wemust refrain from those that will ultimately lead to war based on hatred, greedand jealousy.

There is a big difference in the organization of the Socialist State, theCommunist State and the Gandhian State at that plane where moralconsiderations come in. In the case of organizations also there is somedifference. There is difference in the way in which we are trying to work it. Ifone wants to have centralised methods of production, one should be preparedfor regimentation which contributes to a mentality conducive to dictatorship."Ours is not to reason why; ours is but to do and die." In the Gandhian economy,each man is responsible to his own God. If we do that, we must depend on theInner Voice. Through self-discipline and self-control we should develop thepower of discerning right from then comes Civil Disobedience. The mind shouldbe prepared to take the consequences of that Disobedience. Gandhian economy  is based on moral and spiritual forces. Each individual is supreme; eachindividual is considered a potentially divine person; each individual representsthat which is immortal in man. Otherwise we are no better than a Zoo. We riseabove the animal kingdom in so far only as we develop our higher self. Whenthe economic and social organisations are so tuned as to encourage individualdevelopment and expression, we have what may be called the Gandhian Socialorder. Herein lies the difference between communism, socialism andGandhism.

In the lower levels of material considerations also there is some difference.

Ultimately the material welfare of the whole society too is our concern. Itmakes a big difference when society is viewed as composed of individuals in theGandhian ideal. Society is looked upon as an aggregate made up of individualscontributing to make such a society. In socialism individual development is notnecessarily the objective. It may be even definitely against such an end.

### GANDHIAN ECONOMY

Here is a picture of Gandhian Society. The organization will be one whichproduces all that is necessary with the co-operation of the people around fortheir primary needs, viz., food, clothing, shelter, education of a type and otherpublic utilitizes brought about by the method of decentralized control. Thegreater the control, the less is its approach to the Gandhian ideal. This wouldlead to chaos, if the ideal of self-control and self-discipline were not there. Forinstance, we have a blue print for construction of buildings. We see a mason isworking by himself in the corner. Yet it is not chaos. Because the architect hasplanned where the different buildings, should be put up. Each group works outthe print into details. That controlling plan in life is the achievement of non-violence and truth. There cannot be chaos because they are eternal principles.

They had no beginning and they will be there tomorrow when we are all gone.

In an universal principle there can be no chaos. Each man is connected up withthe power that is generated. In Calcutta, Madras and Bombay we have electrictramways. They are controlled in two ways. As long as they are on the rails  below and connected with the livewire above, they cannot deviate from thepath. The moment they deviate, the connection goes off. As long as we are intouch with the Eternal Power on the one side and the track below, there can beno chaos. With self-control and self-discipline we cannot go wrong any morethan a mason goes wrong in building, as long as he follows closely the blue printprovided by the architect. His relationship is to the Master mind and the Masterbuilder. Whatever our plan may be, if we direct it towards the achievement ofnonviolence and truth, which is the main plan, through self- control and self-discipline, just like the rails below, we shall attain unity of action andconformity with the rest of society. Chaos will come in if individuals are notqualified and equipped with these underlying requirements. In Gandhiansociety, therefore, there is full scope for each individual to express himself andyet sterilize the possible danger of chaos.

Now, on this basis we can lay down a plan for group action. The first thing weneed is food. We must organize ourselves for production of food on a co-operative basis. We should know what we want. There is a certain thing calledbalanced diet. It is not merely taking cereals but it aims at balancing it withother items also. In addition to wheat we must have a little fat. We alsorequire a certain amount of minerals. But there is very little mineral in cereals.

To compensate that small quantity, we use vegetables and fruits. We shall havewheat as the staple food, balanced with ghee, fruits, vegetables and otheritems of that nature. Supposing we want to have a balanced diet for 6000persons. We have the menu; we would require 6000 lbs. of wheat if we allow 6ounces a person. Similarly we calculate all other requirements. Having takenthe total requirements we plan the amount of acreage that should be placedunder wheat, etc. We would then know how much land is necessary forproducing wheat, dal, etc. We shall need, say, about 12,000 acres. Having gotit, we plough the land. There may be a variety of soil. We produce the thingsneeded by us from the land suited to the crop. It may be that we cannotproduce sufficient cotton in that area. We may produce vegetables, andexchange that surplus with somebody else for another thing which he has grownand which we need but do not have. In this way we have got to plan out our  cultivation. This is called balanced cultivation, referring back to its source,namely, balanced diet. In this manner we shall be able to meet our needswithin our circle, or failing that, with the co-operation of the circle outside.

For this we ought to have the cooperation of everybody. We stop all trading; allproduction from a particular group comes into the common pool---themultipurpose co-operative society. Suppose one requires oil. The surplus ofwheat produced by one will be utilised of supplying the one with oil. The co-operative society will get the oil seeds from farmers who cultivate it. The oilmen do not produce seeds. The co-operative society has the seed and theoilman extracts oil. There is no payment made to the man. The return is not inthe form of any money. The oil goes back to the co-operative society and theoil cake remains with the man. In the past this system of payment was reallyworking well. That system is in existence to this day in some villages.

The whole of the payment was made on this cooperative system of a commonpool and out of the common pool everybody got something for the commonservices they rendered to society---the barber, the scavenger, the dhobie, thevillage sweeper, etc. When the threshing of corn goes on, each village servantincluding the teacher gets his quota distributed from the general pool. He getsit for certain service he renders. In those days we could not have a largenumber of razors. The barber had one razor. It was a specialized service he wasrendering. The blacksmith prepared steel and iron. He prepared also the razor.

If each individual had to have a razor, we shall be wasting iron and steel. In ourold organization we had the village servants who got their quota, or minimumwage, out of the common pool for the services they rendered. The cobblerprepared one pair of chappals every year for each of the village people. Thechamar gave one mote to each farmer. If anyone wanted an extra chappal, hewill have to pay for it separately. Each village servant's maintenance was takencare of out of the common pool. Today we have the Multipurpose Co-operativeSociety which can be really the economic centre which can organize theplanning for the whole community. We see how the economic organization canallow for the production of all necessary things.  If we have a group working, in an organization of 25,000 persons there will bespecialists such as engineers etc. In our old organization we had irrigationprojects. The irrigation method guaranteed a certain amount of fertility to thesoil. There was what was known as the double tank system. There is first asmall tank. The small tank receives the water first. The water comes in withsediment and it precipitates more on less all the sediment in the first tank andthen the clear water runs over to the bigger tank. The second tank is the onewhere the water is stored, and it is used for irrigating the fields through canals.

The silt is the first tank becomes the property of certain farmers, who keep itfully dredged while taking out their own share of the deposited silt. The secondtank does not get silted and, therefore, water accumulates there to a largeextent. Here is both service and self- interest jointly working together for thecommon good. We are rendering a service to the community by keeping theirrigation tank from getting silted over. That is nature's way of giving wages.

Supposing there is a picnic. The members eat and throw away the crumbs. Halfa dozen crows come and eat them away and keep the place clean. There is''work and wages' connected with it. Ants come and eat the sugar that is spiltover. Our old organization was based on the system where money wages werenot given separately. These are the principles on which we should re-build oursociety. We should study the conditions and the advantages in that civilizationwe had enjoyed once. We are becoming more and more barbarians.

In our re-organized society we want to introduce those social principles. If wewant water to run in one direction all that we have to do is to see that thelevel of the flow of water is regulated. We have got to arrange our social orderin such a way that every one while working for his own interest works also forSociety. Our Panchayats should really be trained for general service. There maybe one Panchayat for a group of 20 or 30 villages. We take the villagers at theTehsil level, then advance to the District level and then to the Provincial leveland then to the Central level. Only then can we develop a nationalgovernment. Men trained in running their own affairs will proceed, according totheir qualifications further and further until they reach the top. We had ancientkingdoms run on these lines. We should read history in this light and not  memorize dates and other details. We must study these things and translatethem into action in our lives.

Our needs will not be properly attended to until we galvanise the necessarytalent and bring it to bear on the needs of the whole nation. That is our generalpicture of the outline plan of the villages, and a conception of how we wantthe economic, the social and the national organisation to be built up based onthe character of the people on the basis of service and a sense of duty, movingtowards the progressive attainment of nonviolence and truth in human society.


## CHAPTER 6

### CONCLUSION

In the preceding chapters we have seen that the objective of all human activityis not merely on the material level but has an enormous bearing on our socialorder and culture through the development of individual personality. We worktowards bringing into being a civilization that will not depend on theexploitation of our fellowmen and at that cost afford a high standard ofmaterial living to a few. If the Gandhian ideology prevails it should result in afairly even standard of material comforts for everybody and bring about a typeof civilization where there will be no need for periodic wars as at present.

Let us hope that the day will soon dawn that Tolstoy was looking forward to,when the people, weary of all the meaningless misery and bloodshed, will sayto their leaders, "Go from us, put on the bloody uniforms yourselves and killyour own kind---It matters not to us whether we are considered a great or smallpeople all that matters to us is that we should enjoy, undisturbed, the fruits ofour toil---and all peace loving people should be permitted to develop their livesin mutual harmony and understanding."

This is not an impossible 'heaven on earth' that we are seeking. Humanity isbeing driven by force of circumstances towards self-sufficiency in food andprimary needs. If this tendency is resisted persistently the other alternative isthe wiping out of the human race by competitive armament and progressivedestruction and annihilation of one nation by another. Will man have theforesight to choose the right path?

The way indicated by Gandhiji is not one which only the few great persons canfollow. It is so simple that the humblest citizen amongst us can adopt. Itconsists in leading our own individual lives according to the dictates of thatwhich is highest in us. It, of course, means self- control and self-disciplineinstead of self-indulgence as at present. We have to set up a code of action ora standard of values based on social, moral and spiritual considerations. This  will be the only way that can usher in Ram Rajya for all people and bring peaceand true prosperity for every individual.

